HENRY; IN FOUR VOLUMES.
BY THE AUTHOR OF ARUNDEL.
VOL. I.

Ficta voluptatis causâ sint proxima veris,
Nec quodcunque volet poscat sibi fabula credi.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR CHARLES DILLY, IN THE POULTRY. 1795.



ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
IT is a custom with some authors to introduce their works by a prefatory appeal to the candour of the Reader, and circumstances may undoubtedly combine to justify the measure; but when a man acts from his own free motives in resorting to the press, how can he be warranted for intruding on the Public without a proper confidence in his powers for entertaining them? True respect to the Reader refers itself to his judgment, and makes no attempts upon his pity. The purchaser of these volumes would have just reason to complain of his bargain, if he were to find nothing in them but a sample of my modesty in the Preface, and a long dull story at the end of it; and I should only prove that I thought more meanly of his taste than of my own talents, were I to presume that he could be well

pleased with a production, of which my own opinion was so very humble, as to stand in need of an apology for presenting it to him: I therefore hold it as fair dealing to premise, thar, if these volumes do not merit his approbation, they have small claim upon his candour, forasmuch as they have been carefully and deliberately written, some years having passed since the first hand was put to them; during which no diligence has been spared to make them worthy, both in stile and matter, of that generous Public, who are so justly intitled to every grateful exertion on my part, and to whose future favours it is my best ambition to aspire.

THE AUTHOR.




CONTENTS.

BOOK THE FIRST.
CHAP. I. The high Dignity, Powers, and Prerogatives of the Novel-writer Page 1
CHAP. II. The History commences Page 7
CHAP. III. A Duck disturbs the tranquillity of a Doctor Page 18
CHAP. IV. Strength is overthrown by Skill Page 23
CHAP. V. There are more Cordials in the World than Philosophy has found out Page 28
CHAP. VI. A Saint not sober Page 35
CHAP. VII. A timely Rescue Page 43
CHAP. VIII. A sudden Attack upon an unguarded Conscience Page 50
CHAP IX. Doctors differ Page 60
CHAP. X. One more Dose than is to be found in the Dispensary Page 74
CHAP. XI. Meditations in a Kitchen Page 84



BOOK THE SECOND.
CHAP. I. Reasons for writing as fast as we can Page 95
CHAP. II. The History goes to the Ale-house—Bella, horrida Bella! Page 100
CHAP. III. A Story gains by telling Page 116
CHAP. IV. A Key to unlock the Stocks Page 124
CHAP. V. An Opportunity not improved Page 134
CHAP. VI. He that won't take Caution must take Consequences Page 145
CHAP. VII. A Man may be led to act mercifully upon evil Motives Page 152
CHAP. VIII. Innocence may, by Circumstances, assume the Appearance of Guilt Page 160
CHAP. IX. Audi alteram partem Page 170
CHAP. X. Solvuntur tabulae Page 176
CHAP. XI. When the Heart is right, the Man will be respectable, though his Humours are ridiculous Page 187


BOOK THE THIRD.
CHAP. I. A Dissertation, which our Readers will either sleep over, or pass over, as suits them best Page 201
CHAP. II. A Morning Visit, which produces a suspicous Situation Page 206

CHAP. III. Fortune begins to smile upon our Hero Page 220
CHAP. IV. There are Secrets in all Families Page 229
CHAP. V. Our Hero relates his Adventures.—A religious Controversy concludes with a Battle Page 242
CHAP. VI. Is any Merry? Let him sing Psalms Page 252
CHAP. VII. Our Hero gratifies the Curiosity of his Host Page 264
CHAP. VIII. Love and Ambition are no Friends to Sleep Page 273
CHAP. IX. A domestic Scene in upper Life Page 280
CHAP. X. Our Hero is seen in a very dangerous Situation Page 292
CHAP. XI. Our Hero engages in an Expedition, where he is exposed to fresh Dangers Page 304





HENRY.

BOOK THE FIRST.

CHAPTER I. The high Dignity, Powers, and Prerogatives of the Novel Writer.
ALL the world will acknowledge the superiority of works of invention over those of compilation. The writer of novels, therefore, will take rank before the writer of matter of fact, and rest his title to precedence upon his proofs of originality. Possibly this may be ill relished by the historian, who holds himself as an author of a high class; and, indeed, it seems to bear a little hard upon his prerogatives, who, generally speaking, can boast as good a share of invention as those who more immediately profess it.
The accounts which historians favour us with of the early ages and origin of nations would be novels, if fiction alone could make them such; but having only the improbabilities, without the amusing properties, of Fairy

Tales and Arabian Nights, they cannot rank even with the lowest works of fancy.
The histories of the heroic ages are better entitled to be considered as romances: the adventures of a Hercules, a Theseus and a Jason, afford some little entertainment to the reader, but it is a compliment to call them the Quixotes of antiquity.
The writers of the lives of illustrious persons, like the novelists, generally make their own hero; but not often with the same attention to nature: the lying legends of Pythagoras, Abaris and Apollonius would not pass upon the world in any fiction, that did not avowedly bid defiance to credibility.
The liberty some writers take of embellishing their histories with florid speeches and declamations, put into the mouths of people who, probably, never uttered a single sentence as it is set down in their parts, is a palpable intrusion on the province of the dramatist or novelist, who, building fables upon old foundations, with the help of a few historic characters and facts, give an air of truth to fiction. Here I might instance those amusing fabrications in our own times, entitled Parliamentary Debates, where truth and shorthand

have no share with invention, and the senator's best historian is he that is least faithful to his words.
In short, there have been, and still are, many more novelists in the world of letters, than have taken credit to themselves for it, or perhaps ever suspected they were entitled so to do.
After all, it is only in the professed department of the novel that true and absolute liberty is enjoyed. If I was now writing the history of Alexander the Great, who, as every body believes, died of a drunken fit, let me do what I will with him in the career of his victories, drunk he must be at last, and drunk he must die. With the hero of my novel it is otherwise: over him I have despotic power; his fate and fortune, life or death, depend on my will; and whether I shall crown him with length of days and prosperity, or cut short his thread by an untimely stroke, is a question within my own choice to determine; and though I must account to nature and probability for the regularity of my proceedings, no appeal lies to truth and matter of fact against my positive decision in the case. I have those powers in my hand which the historian, properly

so called, hath not; I am not tied down to any incidents and events which I cannot over-rule; I may deal punishment to the evil, and reward to the good, which he whose pen must record the dispensations of Providence rarely hath in his power to do: for the moral of my story, therefore, I am fairly responsible, and no less for the purity of the narrative; for though the real scenes of life can hardly fail to contaminate the page that records them, the writer who invents impurities is without excuse.
I know that the privileges of the novelist are more than can well be defined, and his range wider than that portion of created nature which is known to us; yet I do not meditate to stretch my rights so far, nor shall put my privileges to their full exertion: it is not my ambition to run truth out of sight, or put credulity out of breath by following me; I do not propose to make any demands upon my hero that he cannot reasonably fulfil, or press him into streights from which virtue, by its native energy, cannot extricate herself with ease; I shall require of him no sacrifices for the sake of public fame, no pedantic, ostentatious apathy, for his lot is humble, and his

feelings natural; I shall let him swim with the current, and not strive to tow him against the stream of probability.
I know that I could play my puppets after my own fancy, for the wires are in my hand; that I could make them declaim like heroes in a tragedy, or gabble like a gang of gypsies under a hedge; that I could weave my fable, as the Turks do carpets, without counterfeiting the likeness of any one thing in earth, sea, or air; produce beings out of nature, that no sober author ever dreamt of, and force beings into nature, that no well-bred reader ever met with: but I have lived long enough to see wonderful revolutions effected by an intemperate abuse of power, and shall be cautious how I risque privileges so precious upon experiments so trivial.
I am not sure that I shall make my leading characters happy enough to satisfy the sanguine, serious enough to suit the sentimental, or beautiful enough to warm the imagination of the animated reader. Some may think I have not been sufficiently liberal to them in point of fortune, others may wish I had favoured them with a few more casualties and misadventures. I am aware that, in a novel,

travelling the road is very hazardous, that even taking the air does not secure the company from a sudden overturn in their carriage, and that few adventurers ever set foot in a boat without a soaking in the water; but I have not yet found out the wit of being mischievous. I perceive that broken bones are considered as becoming appendages to young gentlemen when in love; that faintings and hysterics are expected of young ladies upon all tender occasions; and that a burning hot fever, with a high delirium, is one of the warmest topics we can strike upon, and heightens the charms of a heroine beyond any other expedient that can be started for the purpose. All these weapons I know are within my reach, and the use of them I know; but it is a cut-finger business at best, and I think them safest in the sheath.
One thing, however, there is for me to do, that cannot be dispensed with, though I shall, probably, hold it off as long as I can—I must make love, and I am far from sure I shall make it in a style to please my readers. I wish to my heart I knew what sort of love they best like; for there are to many patterns, I am puzzled how to choose what shall please them.

I have been sometimes told, that the author of Arundel was not far from the butt; if so, I hope I am as good a marksman as he is. This, if I rightly remember, was rather point-blank firing; now I am inclined to think I shall give my piece a certain elevation that will send the shot upon a range: but it is no matter how I manage it, so it does but reach the heart at last.
Precedents in plenty are before me; heroes and heroines of all tempers, characters, and descriptions, love-suits as long as Chancery-suits; hearts conquered at a glance, surprized by treachery, or stormed by impudence—yet where to fix I know not.
I will ask advice of Nature, and rule myself by her report.


CHAPTER II. The History commences.
IT was in a summer-evening, whilst the sun was yet above the horizon, when Doctor Zachary Cawdle, practitioner in physic, surgery, and man-midwifry, gently ambled across the market-place of a certain town, upon the

eastern coast of this happy island called England. He was on his road homewards from a patient, whom he had left in that situation which every good wife will naturally covet, and every prudent spinster would do well to avoid: he was in high good-humour with his day's work, for his task had been easy and his reward liberal: He had touched a handsome fee in ready cash from the husband of his patient, for which he had only given him a draft upon time, in the person of an infant heir; and how many chances and crosses a venture, dependant on the contingency of twenty-one years credit, must be liable to, let those, who have staked their happiness upon such expectations, declare.
Zachary, who was indebted to the courtesy of his neighbours for putting Doctor before his name, which by their favour was a title not without profit, as well as honour, no sooner made his entry into this place of public resort, than he was recognized by so many of his friends and customers, that, having no present call upon his time, and being withal a man of a social quality, he was induced to make a halt, and to enter into parley on the saddle. The annual custom of hiring servants upon

this day had brought the farmers together in considerable numbers, and, business being over, the market-place was clear of the human cattle, with which it had lately been stocked; so that had Zachary been in search of a stout hind to do the drudgery of his house, there was none such in his eye.
One solitary youth, the refuse as it should seem, and outcast of the market, was standing in a corner of the square, where the conservators of the public peace had erected a whipping-post, embellished with figures in bas-relief, more to be admired for the moral of the design than for the gracefulness of it's execution. Upon this instrument of correction the aforesaid youth was leaning in a most disconsolate posture, in the listless act of twirling the point of a hazle switch between the crevices of the pavement, and so intent was he upon the melancholy task, that Doctor Zachary Cawdle, the treading of whose palfrey was none of the nimblest or least noisy, had brought the head of old Betty nearly in contact with his breast, before he either raised his eyes from the ground, or stopt the circumrotatory operation of his hand.

Zachary, who might well be credited for his skill in judging of the human form, having handed so many of his fellow-creatures into the world, and doubtless dispatched not a few out of it, had now, with the eye of a connoisseur, taken measure of the object who seemed so insensible to his scrutiny; and if the honest farmers had this day staid at home, and sent their dames on the errand, it is more than probable this unlucky candidate, now rejected on all hands, would not have been the last on the list; but different services require different qualifications, and he stands but a poor chance for his election into the offices of carter or ploughman, who has nothing to recommend him but the graces of his person and the harmony of his features.
His apparel, though neither sumptuous nor superfluous, being nothing more than a short close waistcoat or doublet of blue cloth and breeches of white ticking, was such however as gave a fair display to the perfect symmetry of his form: an artist would have taken him in his present habit, in preference to the robes of the garter.
Zachary, now raising himself on his stirrups,

and leaning forward upon the neck of his palfrey, roared out with the voice of authority, "Hark-ye, fellow, can you chuse no better place to rest your back against than the whipping-post? Gramercy, lad, you'll find him but a treacherous companion, if you trust your carcase to his keeping; he has made many a lazy back smart before parting, for hugging him so closely as you do."

The youth, thus accosted, raised his eyes from the ground, and fixing them on the countenance of the speaker, seemed as if he would have said, "What is your pleasure, sir? I do not understand your raillery,"—at the same time he lifted from his head the scanty remnant of a hat, and presented to the eyes of Zachary a countenance, upon which Nature had engrossed in her fairest and most legible characters—Your jest is misapplied: let the bearer pass unsuspected!

It can hardly be supposed, that a person of Zachary's sagacity, and one withal who professed himself a physiognomist, could overlook or mistake what was so plain to be seen and understood. The many specimens he had met with of nature's hand-writing, before hypocrisy

had marred the characters, could not but qualify him to read without error a text so fair as was now laid open to his view; and certain it is, he proceeded to question the youth in a milder tone, "Why he stood there idle, when the market-place was empty, and all business over?"—"Because no man had hired him, and he had no where to go," was the answer to this question. "Had he no parents?" the poor lad shook his head and was silent. The question was repeated: it produced nothing but the same silence, and the same melancholy action; he had again rivetted his eyes upon the ground, and was beginning to renew the operation of the hazel twig, working it into the joints of the pavement; when Zachary, whose curiosity was now roused, muttered to himself, "There is a mystery in all this;" and then, addressing himself to the lad, added, "Well, well! if you do not chuse to answer my question about your parents, I suppose you will not scruple to tell me whether you have been in service before, who was your last master, and what employment you are fit for?" To this the youth replied, "That he had been for a very short time in the family of a grazier, in a distant county; but as

it was his first place, and his service in it so short, he could not say that he was expert in any menial employment, but he hoped upon a trial he should be found willing to learn."


"That is sincere at least," cried the Doctor; "but as you say your late master dwells at a distance, and do not tell me his name, I shall hope you can produce a good testimony under his hand to your character."—"I am sorry to say I cannot," he replied. "How so, how so?" quoth Zachary; "hast left it behind thee, child? or would not he give thee any character?"—"Not so," answered the youth, "he is free enough to give me a character; but it is such an one as will never recommend me to another master."—"And do you confess it?" rejoined the other, somewhat petulantly; "if such be your character, no wonder you are out of place; nay, I should rather say you are in the only place proper for you; you are in the right to make friends with the whipping-post, for I perceive you are in fair train to find employment there, and no where else."—"I am in a likely train to be starv'd," cried the poor lad, with a sigh, "if my master's word is to be taken for truth; but I hope I shall not be corrected for what I never committed:

'tis punishment enough to be deprived of the means of earning my bread; 'twill be hard if I am to be flead into the bargain; but God's will be done! I am a helpless creature, and must submit to my hard fortune. I was born in misery, and in misery I must die."

There is a voice, a look, a tone in truth and innocence, which holds a sympathy with the hearts of those, on whom their evidences light, irresistibly impressive: what honest Zachary wore in his bosom, under his left ribs, was fairly made by Nature of real flesh and blood, and not of flint or adamant, or any such impenetrable substance as she sometimes puts in the place of better workmanship and softer materials, whereby the owners become as it were casemated and bomb-proof against all besiegers, of which number pity and compassion, though in appearance the most gentle, are in fact amongst the most importunate and persevering; insomuch that the said Zachary had no sooner heard these words, and reconnoitred the signs and symbols of truth and innocence, which accompanied them, than he felt something like a string or chord vibrating and tingling in the aforesaid region

under his ribs, which running along the ducts and channels that communicated with his tongue, put that little member into motion, and produced the following words:

"Though it has never been my practice to take any one into my service, without a testimony as to character, yet I am strongly tempted, for once to wave my rule in thy favour. If thou art a knave, I am no physiognomist; it behoves thee therefore to be honest, for my credit as well as thine own; and now tell me, in the first place, what is thy name?"—"Henry," replied the youth."—"Henry!" cried Zachary, "so much for thy christian name; "but thou hast another?"—"I pray you," rejoined Henry, "to know me by none other, and I will obey you and serve you as faithfully by that one name, as if I had a hundred."—"Heyday!" exclaimed Zachary, "what is all this? not tell your name, sirrah! What good reason can you have for concealing that?"—"What bad one can I have," replied Henry, "since I might so easily have imposed a false one upon you in its place, but that I scorn'd to answer your question untruly?"—"That's well, that's well!" cried the Doctor; "it cannot be denied;

so let it pass for the present: and now tell me with the same sincerity, what business you are fit for, what is it you can do?"—"I can write and read," said he, "and tolerably well keep accounts, if I were entrusted with them."—"So far so good," quoth the Doctor, "what besides?"—"I can play a little upon the flute, if I were owner of one; and upon occasion make shift to sing psalms after a fashion; at least, I can chime in with those that are better at a stave than myself."—"Humph!" cried Zachary, "this is no great matter, for I have no ear for a pipe, and seldom, if ever, any leisure to attend the church; but go on."—"I have been made to tend the poultry, help pen the sheep-fold, and do a little with my hough at the turnips."—"But I grow no turnips," quoth Zachary, "feed no sheep, and harbour neither cock, hen, nor capon."—"The worse luck mine," replied Henry: "I am well used to horses, and can follow the hounds."—"So cannot I," muttered Zachary.—"I can upon a pinch worm the puppies, cut their dewclaws and round their ears."—"The devil you can!" cried the Accoucheur, somewhat out of humour; "and what are all these things to me? I never suffered puppy to be about

my house; I have plagues enough without such companions. Is there nothing you can do in my way? Let us have the whole."—"The whole then," said Henry, "must be comprised in a willing mind; I can pretend to nothing else, unless it be any recommendation to me that I can turn my hand to the distilling of elder-flowers and mint-water, and in a common way to the picking of simples; but of this I make little boast, for indeed I am no great proficient in this or in any thing else."


"Enough!" quoth Zachary, "you have at last hit the nail on the head; and nothing now remains but to clinch the bargain."—"Feed me, and clothe me," said the poor lad, "and I shall be well content to serve you to the best of my capacity."—"Say you so," replied the Doctor, "then come on, my good fellow! we have not above two miles to my home, and you shall hoof it, whilst I jog gently on: I'll engage you can keep pace with old Betty on a pinch; and as for your baggage, I suppose it is all upon your back."

This said, the Doctor applied his left heel, which was the only one that carried arms, to the ribs of his mare, and provoked her into a gentle shuffle, whilst Henry gave a flourish

with his sapling, in token of triumph, and sprung forwards with a light heart and empty stomach, as nimble as a roebuck.


CHAPTER III. A Duck disturbs the Tranquillity of a Doctor.
IF Nature, when she moulded the person of Doctor Zachary Cawdle, had been aware of the profession to which Fortune was in future to devote her bantling, it may be presumed, she would not have forgotten that expedition is one main requisite in the business of an accoucheur: but unless rotundity be a mark of speed, even the person of Jeffery Gambado of immortal memory had not less resemblance to a light horseman, than what honest Zachary now exhibited on the back of old Betty, upon which he sate astride with two legs, in shape not unlike the balustrades of a bridge, strutting out from the ribs of his mare, wide as the fork of a pair of compasses, when stretcht upon a globe.
He wore a full suit of cinnamon-coloured

cloth, with boot cuffs and buckram skirts; a vast bushy perriwig, close dipt and frizzled, like a yew-tree hedge; with an enormous three-cornered hat, mounted peak upwards from the back of his head, which, like the gnomon of the dial, might have served to mark the hour of noon upon his forehead, had the sun been in his meridian. The animal that carried him was of a piece with her rider, a thick unwieldy clod, of cart-horse pedigree, slow-paced, short-winded and a huge feeder. No wonder, therefore, if Henry on his feet was more than a match for his master in the saddle.
A little brook, that bounded the parish in which Zachary lived, pretty equally divided their whole line of march, which we have before observed did not exceed two miles. Over this stream there was a foot-plank, that afforded a passage for Henry, whilst the Doctor proceeded through the ford, where, according to custom, he halted to indulge the old mare with a draught of the limpid element, which her unsophisticated palate preferred to all the fabricated compounds in her owner's shop, or even in his cellar itself.
At a short distance down the stream, was a

mill, which this water turned. Now it so chanced, as old Betty was moving up the brook instinctively, in search of a clearer run, her flouncing in the ford disturbed a duck, who was hovering her young under the bank, and now flew up from her nest, quacking and flapping her wings in a most clamorous manner. The din she made, and the suddenness of the alarm, were too much for the philosophy even of old Betty to put up with, though few beasts could boast of nerves less irritable than her's; but truth must be confessed, the surprize so totally overpowered her natural phlegm, that having given a vehement plunge in the water, by way of warning to her rider, and following this up rather too precipitately with a sudden toss of her head, whilst he was stooping forwards to give her the rein, the respective sculls met each other with so much good will, and such a hearty welcome, that Zachary's hat and wig, not being fixtures, rebounded from the concussion, and proceeded to float down the stream very lovingly together, as friends should, towards the mill wheel, till they were arrested in their progress by Henry, from the foot-bridge, who fished them up with his hazel switch, as they were fairly on

their way towards their last home, calling out at the same time to his master—"Have a care, Sir! hold fast, or you'll get a sowsing"—a caution, which was by no means unseasonable, as the attitude Zachary was then in, upon the crupper of his startled beast, was exactly such as exhibited symptoms of falling in their most prominent character.
The duck, who had a friend at home, took her flight towards the mill, vociferating most incontinently by the way, till she had called out the miller's dog, who sallied forth in her defence with all possible alacrity, bristling every hair with ardour for revenge, and rushing to the ford, where the flouncing and dashing of the water directed him to the scene of action. Without a moment's hesitation, this amphibious animal plunged into the stream, at the very moment when Zachary's fate hung upon the balance, and the nymph of the brook was preparing to receive him in her arms. His head, according to the principles of action and reaction of elastic bodies, had taken a tour through the segment of a parabola, and was now in its declination towards the crupper of old Betty, when the avenger of the duck seized the skirt of his coat, and spite of all

impediments, which staytape and buckram could oppose to his gripe, took so fast a hold, and gave the luckless Accoucheur so hearty a tug in the crisis of vacillation, that he came backwards into the pool—and terrible was the fall thereof.
The dog kept his hold, and Zachary, who was bodily immersed in the pool, had swallowed more of that beverage at a draught than had served him for a twelve-month before; so that had he kept his present quarters but a few moments longer, he might have set the Humane Society and all its experiments at defiance; and the child that is unborn might have rued the woeful event of this day: when Fortune, or more probably the tutelary goddess Lucina, sent a messenger to his rescue, in the person of Henry, who had no sooner redeemed hat and wig, those ornaments of his person, from the cogs of the mill-wheel, than he flew to snatch their principal from the teeth of the mastiff. Having set his master on his legs, the valorous youth instantly seized the furious animal by the throat, and griped him with so strong a hand, that at length he threw him, with lolling tongue and eyes rolling in death, breathless on the bank; he then returned

to tender his further services to poor Zachary, who presented a most piteous spectacle, in his cinnamon-coloured suit, alas! how changed, with every pocket full of water, his bald pate covered with duck weed, dripping down his shoulders, being in caricature the very model of a Dutch river-god: upon the shore lay his flaxen perriwig, a melancholy wreck, and beside it old Betty, the origin of all evil, browsing insensibly on the bank, as if nothing had happened, and regardless of all other concerns than what affected herself.


CHAPTER IV. Strength is overthrown by Skill.
IT was happy for the Doctor, in his present plight, that he had a house of refuge to near at hand: the miller, Thomas Weevil by name, no sooner heard of his misfortune, than both he and his dame sallied forth, to tender him all the assistance needful in his distress. Dry cloaths and fresh linen were instantly provided, and all the rights of hospitality duly performed by the master and mistress of the family, who neglected nothing that could shew

their good will and gratitude for past services, Zachary having been the happy instrument of ushering eight sturdy bantlings into the world, in succession, without a single slip or miscarriage by the way.
The eldest of this groupe, a sturdy youth about the age of Henry, had left his father to do the honours of the house to the Doctor, whilst he was applying himself to the recovering of his favourite dog. When all the efforts which his art could suggest proved fruitless, with rage and disappointment equally inflamed, he turned furiously upon the author of his calamity, and seizing him by the collar, swore vehemently to be revenged: a struggle ensued, the young miller striving to drag Henry towards the water, with an intent, no doubt, to make atonement to the manes of his canine friend, in the very spot where he met his death.
Henry, who had command over his temper, and only sought to pacify the anger of his assailant, opposed himself with calmness to the attack, expostulating meanwhile on the injustice of assaulting him, for what it was his duty to do in defence of a fellow-creature; and very properly demanding, if the life of a Christian

was not of more value than the life of a dog? Young Weevil, who was not at leisure to lend a patient ear to arguments of this sort, and who probably ascribed the coolness of the dogslayer to the wrong motive, seemed only to gather fresh resentment by what ought to have appeased it, and now redoubled his attack with such fury, that our hero found it high time to resort to other defences than words; and having, by a sudden jerk, extricated himself from the grasp of the enraged aggressor, seized him in return, and having the advantage in skill as well as agility, kicked up his heels, and, pitching him flat upon his back, committed him with so good a will to his mother earth, that if the emblem of man's life is but dust and ashes, it was never more strikingly exemplified, than in the cloud which now ascended from the mealy frock of the prostrate miller. Stunned by his fall, and extended at his length, the champion and his dog lay side by side, till Henry, who did not wish to have more lives than one to answer for, began to fear they meant to keep company together to the shades of death: a few moments however relieved him from that anxiety, when the fallen combatant, getting upon his legs

and giving himself a shake, by way of enquiry if all was right and in its place, surveying the person of his conqueror from heel to head, as if he had been taking measure of a mealsack, and spying there no bones or sinews, which he was not conscious of possessing in greater outward proportion himself, vociferated in a furious tone, that he was a cowardly rascal, and no fair fighter; adding, with a hearty oath, "Bar tripping, and I'll box you for a crown."

Henry calmly replied, "That what he had done was in self-defence, and not with an intent to hurt him, which he was glad to see was not the case; therefore" added he, "be satisfied with what you have got, and don't provoke a worse mischance, by compelling me to handle you after another fashion."—"You are a sneaking puppy," cried the miller, "and no man; all your play lies in your heels: but I'll make you take to them in another guess manner, before I quit you; if I had you in a ring, sirrah, I'd make a frog of you in half a dozen rounds, so I wou'd; I'd maul you like a raggamuffin as you are."


"You had better let me alone," answered Henry; "I have other business than to fight

battles, and as for your abuse, I don't regard it. Go to your work, friend, and leave me to mine; I am the Doctor's servant, and have no otherwise affronted you, than by defending my master; so let us shake hands, and there's an end of it."


"You lie!" retorted the clown, who had again misconstrued the calmness of his antagonist, "there is no end of it, and I'll shake hands with no such shirker as you are. I tell you once again, bar tripping, and I'll box it fairly out with you to-morrow noon, upon the Town Green, foot to foot; and because I know you for a shy cock, and a trickster at the game, I'll have no tumbler's play; neither party shall drop without a knock-down blow; so here's my crown upon the battle, if you are worth so much, if not I'll fight you for love, and give you a belly-full for nothing: there's an end of the matter, I am your man—strike hands with me if you dare."


"If I dare!" replied Henry; "don't mistake me for a coward, because I am not a bully. I am not afraid of my own risque, but I have no quarrel with you, and besides that have no money to stake against your's. As for the Town Green, I know not where it is, for I

never was in the place I am going to: I am a perfect stranger in these parts, and had rather live in peace with you as a neighbour, than turn out against you for a trifling object, that is not worth wrangling about. However take your own course; if your stomach is not down by to-morrow's noon, and your fall has not disabled you, you know where to find me at the Doctor's; and though I do not wish to seek a quarrel, be assured I have too much spirit to keep out of your way, or put up with an insult."

This said, they parted, Henry to attend upon his master, and Tom Weevil to perform the funeral ceremonies of his mastiff.


CHAPTER V. There are more Cordials in the World than Philosophy has found out.
WHEN Doctor Cawdle had, with old Weevil's assistance, dried his rigging and repaired his damages, he began to put himself in sailing trim, not forgetting first to swallow a precautionary cup of Nantz, by way of fortifying the vitals, and keeping the foe

out of the citadel. A gracious nod, which he bestowed on Henry, gave him to understand that his services were well received; but when old Betty presented herself at the door, led thither by one of the younger fry of the mill, darting a reproachful glance upon her, he exclaimed—"Oh! thou bitch of Babylon! is it thus thou servest me after all my kindness? Could'st thou not be content to swill that paunch of thine in peace, but thou must frisk and frolic in thy cups, till thou had'st tumbled me into the stream, at the peril of my life? Never shalt thou sip more at the ford, or wet thy lips whilst I am on thy back, though thou had'st journeyed as long without drinking as a camel, when she traverses the desarts of Arabia."

This denunciation ended, and no other answer returned but a grunt from old Betty as her ponderous jockey seated himself in the saddle, Zachary shook hands with the hospitable miller, and putting himself under an easy sail, steered for the harbour of his own mansion in the neighbouring village.
As soon as he got out of ear-shot of the miller, he began to vent his bile against the whole race of dogs and ducks, heartily consigning

them to the devil and his dam. He next proceeded to vindicate his own talent for horsemanship, in which he roundly asserted no man ever exceeded him; and then turning to Henry, who was close at his stirrup, he resumed his natural good-humour, and, with many commendations of his courage and address, drew forth a guinea, and, forcing it into his hand, bade him take it as a small gratuity for a great service, and as an earnest of future favours; "Which," added he, "if you go on as you have begun, you will richly merit. Some difficulties, however, you will have to encounter in my family, and it behoves me to caution you against them: there is a lady at home, whom I have not found it very easy to live with, neither will you; Mrs. Cawdle has a few constitutional failings, that are rather troublesome to deal with; a great ambition to be thought a saint, and a strong propensity to make herself a beast; in other words, she will cant and tipple from noon till night. Now there is another passion, concomitant of enthusiasm and inebriety, which I forbear to mention, though it is exactly that, Henry, which I think you are most likely to be hampered with: I shall only hint to you

that the saints are very loving in their cups; and reason enough why they should, as in that case they are quickened by a double dose of the spirit. You are a comely lad, have a care, therefore, that your flesh don't catch fire when her spirit begins to flame. Amongst the many accomplishments you enumerated to me, psalm-singing, if I well remember, was one: you may safely confide that talent to my secrecy, for I never wish to hear a single stave of Sternhold or Hopkins while I live; but if you breathe a word of it to my Jemima, farewell to your lungs, depend on it she will make you tune your pipe to some purpose."

More would have ensued, for Zachary was now in the communicative vein, when old Betty came to a full stop; and Henry, looking up, perceived a neat brick house within a court, the gate of which was flanked by two stone piers, emblematically crowned with gallypots, or, as a virtuoso would have stiled them, cineral urns, supporting a scroll, carried in an arch from one to the other, on which was displayed, in letters of gold, upon a bright blue ground, "Zachary Cawdle, Surgeon, Apothecary, and Man Midwife."

An old woman presented herself at the gate,

and led the mare to the stable, followed by Henry, who modestly contested with her the prerogative of the bridle, but to no purpose. Zachary entered the house; and having peeped into the parlour, where he descried his beloved in her easy chair fast asleep, drew his conclusions, and quietly retired to his chamber.
Mrs. Jemima Cawdle, the spouse of Zachary, was a comely, corpulent lady, of about forty years of age, and had pass'd the best part of her youth in the capacity of house-keeper to a wealthy baronet, who died a bachelor, and from whose bounty she enjoyed an annuity of two hundred pounds, bequeathed to her in recompence for her long and faithful services. Zachary, whose frequent visits to the deceased left him uninformed of no one particular relative to Mrs. Jemima's character and circumstances, might possibly have withstood her personal charms, seeing they were somewhat in the wane, and not a little obscured by sundry flaws in temper and reputation; but he was irresistibly attracted by the charms of the legacy aforesaid, jointly with the intelligence he had obtained of sundry other pickings and gleanings, which that prudent damsel had amass'd by her oeconomy and good conduct:

upon these solid grounds of affection, not referring himself to the blind guidance of a certain hood-wink'd deity called Love, Doctor Zachary lost no time in posting himself on the ground which the baronet had left, and soon opened his honourable trenches before the mournful legatee. Sorrow is a great softener of the human heart, and within two little months, nay, not so much, not two, the fair Jemima yielded up her virgin hand, and was admitted into the sacred mysteries of Hymen.
It cannot be disguised that Public Fame, who is too apt to busy herself about other people's affairs, circulated an idle insinuation that Doctor Zachary had been serviceable to this lady on a former occasion, in relieving her from an indisposition, with which she had been annoyed for the space of eight or nine months, and for which his art found a cure in the very crisis of her distemper; but not to dwell any longer on these silly rumours, which are below the dignity of this history, suffice it to observe, that Mrs. Jemima did not come empty handed to the Doctor, and that, fully conscious of this, she had too much sense of her own dignity to give up her right and title for indulging herself in those innocent habits and recreations

which she had been accustomed to in her state of celibacy, particularly that of applying to a certain specific against qualms and tremors, which she kept at hand, within the precincts of her own closet; and though the said specific was not a medicine to be found upon Zachary's file, nor what perhaps he would have taken on himself to recommend, yet long practice had so reconciled her to the use of it, that her constitution seemed now to call for it, and I cannot doubt but she had strong reasons for preferring it to every thing the Materia Medica could offer in its stead.
Now it so chanced that Mrs. Cawdle, in her spouse's absence, had cheared her heart with a comforting portion of this specific, and in the moment of her good man's arrival was, by the operation of the aforesaid dose, fast locked in the arms of Somnus. All this was perfectly intelligible to Zachary at the first glance, who thereupon contentedly betook himself to his cabin, like a Dutchman when he smells a storm, and quietly turned into his solitary crib, a resource which he kept in petto for these and other occasions incidental to his profession.



CHAPTER VI. A Saint not sober.
THE domestics of the family, into which Henry had now entered, consisted of an antient matron, Bridget by name, who officiated in the kitchen, and Susan May, daughter of a widow woman, an inhabitant of the village, who waited upon the person of Mrs. Cawdle. Doctor Zachary had recommended Henry so strongly to the care and good graces of these kind creatures, that they received him very courteously, and did the honours of the kitchen with much hospitality. Bridget had recollected a cold gammon of bacon, that was standing idle in the cupboard, and Susan had put a fresh faggot on the fire, where she was boiling the water for her mistress's tea. By the light of a chearful blaze she had now an opportunity of reconnoitring the young stranger with more accuracy than hitherto she had been able to do; when, having scanned him over with an eye that betokened something more than pity, gently stroking her hand

over his head, she gave a sigh, and said—"Alas! poor fellow, thou art cold and hungry, I'll engage for thee;"—and then proceeded to other questions, which Henry either answered or evaded, as he thought fit. She now filled out a bason of tea, and repaired with it to her mistress in the parlour.
Susan, who was not bred in the school of Harpocrates, waked her mistress from her slumbers, by the noise she made upon entering the room; whereupon Jemima accosted her as follows,—"Why, what the devil, wench, will you never be taught to open a door softly? Do you consider, mawkin, the wretched state of my poor tortur'd nerves, trembling, quivering, tingling all over me, at every shock you give them? Do you see the quandary you have thrown me into? Then you tread as heavy as a cart-horse, and bawl so loud, that my brain splits with every word you speak."—"But I have not spoken a word yet," cried Susan; "and here's your tea, so pray drink it, and compose yourself."—"Compose myself, child!" replied the mistress in a softer tone; "I don't expect I shall compose myself sufficiently this night to be able to reach my bed-room without help; I perceive

I am relapsing into my old tremors. Mercy upon me, how my hand shakes! Indeed and indeed, my good girl, you must be cautious not to flutter me when I am in this way."

She now took the tea, and whilst she was sipping it, her waiting-woman began to tell her about the Doctor's accident, and how he was rescued from the teeth of the miller's dog, which in Susan's narrative made as tremendous a figure as an Abyssinian hyaena: that good-natured girl having coloured her description of her master's danger to the height, that she might set off the heroism of Henry to the greater advantage.
The sedative beverage having in some degree allayed the trembling of Jemima's nerves, she made many pious apostrophes upon the Doctor's escape, which she hoped would be a warning call upon him to repentance, and a better life: she bewailed the reprobate state he was in; and candidly observed, that as he led the life of a heathen, she should not have been surprized, had he perished by the teeth of a dog. In the mean time, she hinted her astonishment in pretty strong terms, that he could have the assurance to bring a strange fellow into her family, picked up at random,

without consulting her opinion and approbation in the first place. To this Susan replied, "A strange fellow, do you call him, Madam! You would not say so, if you saw him; notwithstanding his poor apparel, I'll be further if he is not a gentleman born; aye, and the handsomest in my opinion that ever I set eyes on."—"What tell you me of handsome," exclaimed the mistress; "is he holy, humble, devout?"—"He was wet and hungry," replied Susan, "so we warmed him and fed him, that's all I know of the matter; as for the rest, its no concern of mine: I only did by him as I would be done by in the like case." This said, Susan left the room without waiting for an answer.
This good lady, who properly put so high a value upon the piety of a servant, and so slight an one upon his person, had in times past led a course of life not perfectly reconcileable to the rules and doctrines of that religion, which is preached by the ministers of the established church; and being naturally indisposed to hear of failings, which it was inconvenient to her to dismiss and repent of, she determined no longer to be annoyed with their sermons and exhortations, and, striking out of

the regular road, took a shorter course for quieting her conscience, without disturbing her enjoyments. By this new method of compounding for defaults in practice, through the help of a strong imagination and a glowing enthusiasm, Jemima had fairly brought all past reckonings to a balance, and at the same time kept a mental salvo in reserve against future ones. She was correct in all small matters of form, regular at her love-feasts, dealt the kiss of peace with a servency most edifying, washed the dirty feet of the brethren, had a pious reverence for salt, and as zealous a detestation for blood-puddings as any saint in the sect, of which she stood forth a bright and shining example, professing to believe every mystery of the Christian faith, and fulfilling no one moral duty, which the Scriptures teach.
She was now exactly in that state of fermentation, when the spirit was most apt to boil over; and having understood just so much from Susan's report of Henry's youth and simplicity, as suggested to her an occasion for making a display of her zeal, she began to arrange her thoughts in the best order she could for the undertaking. Having thrown herself back in her chair, and shut her eyes to

assist meditation, she had nearly fallen into another doze from the soporific effects of intense thinking, when having raised herself upright in her seat, and being seized at the moment with a swimming in her head by the suddenness of the motion a huge pyramid of gauze, which by her late recumbent posture was thrust forward out of its place, came in contact with the candle, and immediately caught fire. Her screams in one instant brought Henry to her assistance, who so nimbly rescued her from her danger, that her cap was off and extinguished before one hair of her head had been singed by the flame.
When her terror had subsided, Mrs. Cawdle cast her eyes upon the person of her deliverer. The alarm had perfectly dissipated her somnolency, and in great part even the cause of it. The ideas, that had floated in her brain, and on which she had been pondering, lost hold of her imagination, and enthusiasm began to give way to impressions of a different sort: she had no longer any wish to make a saint of one, who seemed to her already to be an angel. As the traveller, whose eye has been jaded with long dwelling on the loathsome fens of Essex, feels unspeakable recreation when, having crossed

the Thames, he mounts the beautiful hills of Kent, and thence contemplates nature in her fairest shape—such was the delightful sensation Jemima now experienced, whilst she gazed upon Henry, and compared his animated and graceful form with the listless and mishapen lump, that the fat partner of her heart presented daily and hourly to her weary sight. He had his hand upon the door, so that no time was to be lost, when, with an eager accent, she called out to him to stop; then bidding him shut the door, she began as follows:

"You are the young person, I presume, whom the Doctor has taken into his family, and your name is Henry: you give a good sample of your services, Henry, not only in the care you had of your wetched master in his fall, but no less so in the attention you have now shewn to me in my alarm; in short, between fire and water, you have been fully employed this day in the rescue of us both in our turns, and you well deserve to be rewarded for your performances."


"I am amply rewarded," replied Henry, "by your kind acceptance of my duty in the first place, and next by my master's liberality, who gave me as much as I have occasion

for, and more than I had any right to expect."


"Your master, indeed!" cried Jemima; "your master knows neither how to rate your services, nor to reward you for them; I'll engage he has hir'd you for no other purpose bur to beat the filthy mortar, and do the dirty work in his dirty shop: but you shall do no such thing; you shall wait upon me; I will take you to myself. With me your work will be easy and your life happy, with him you will be a drudge and the lacquey of a drudge; for his very shopman, the old Highlander, will make you fetch and carry on his scrubby errands: from me you will hear none but pious and edifying conversation; from them nothing but balderdash and blasphemy in an outlandish dialect: of me you will gain good instruction; they will lead you to your ruin, and render you in the end, what they are themselves, lost souls in a state of reprobation, and totally cast out from the lot of the righteous."


"Heaven forbid!" quoth Henry.—"Don't say so, don't say so," resumed the saint; "don't shock my ears with a single word in their favour: true zeal feels no pity for the wicked."


"Not pity them!" exclaim'd the youth

with eagerness; "I could almost find in my heart to pity the devil himself."—"The devil you cou'd!" cried the saint, with horror in her countenance; "from what part of the world are you come? who are your unhappy parents? and in what anti-christian principles have you been educated? Pity them, indeed! No, no, that were a sin as heinous as what they commit; but the elect cannot sin, and consequently have no pity for sinners."—"I beg pardon for my boldness, Madam," replied Henry, "but if this be so, I must take leave to dissent from the elect."—This said, he quitted the room, and left the inebriated zealot to digest his doctrine as she could.


CHAPTER VII. A timely Rescue.
THE next morning Henry arose with the lark, and finding nobody stirring within doors, went in to the garden, and there began to employ himself in reforming the borders, that were in a very neglected condition. Whilst he was thus occupied, he observed a tall stout man, whose swaggering gait and important air

bespoke him a person of some authority, coming across the adjoining field, and making directly for a little wicket in the garden hedge, that communicated with the said field. Here he was no sooner arrived than, discovering Henry, he stopt short, and in an angry tone demanded—"Who are you, Sir, and why are you at work in this garden?"—"Because I am servant to the owner of it," Henry replied, "and have nothing else just now to employ myself about."—"If you are servant to the owner," said he, "betake yourself to his shop, and tell Kinloch to send the medicines to my house, that are ordered to be made up."—"And to whose direction must they be addressed?"—"My name is Blachford; you must be new in these parts, not to know me."—"I am a stranger, it is true, in this place," rejoined Henry, "and have not the honour of knowing you, but I shall obey your commands."

After a few minutes Henry, finding nobody up in the house, and the shop-door locked, returned to make report to his sender, who was now standing close under the eaves, in earnest conversation, as it seemed, with somebody at a window: the casement was quickly shut upon

his appearance, but not so nimbly as to prevent his discovering to a certainty that Susan was the party to whom Blachford's conversation was addressed.
The look, that gentleman now bestowed upon Henry, gave him sufficiently to understand how unwelcome his company was; and before he could well explain the reason of his sudden return, Blachford's rage had burst forth both in words and actions, so far at least as his courage suffered him to proceed, by brandishing his cane in a threatening manner, and telling him to be gone from his sight, for he perceived he was a very impertinent prying fellow, and would have nothing to say to him, "And depend upon it," added he, "I will have my eye upon you; if I catch you tripping, and once lay my hands upon you, you shan't easily get out of them."

With these words, which Henry answered only with a look of firm undaunted innocence, Blachford strode away, and was soon out of sight: the casement was then opened, and Susan in a low voice desired him to come into the house, for she wanted to speak to him: as soon as they met, she began with some degree of embarrassment to apologize for appearances.

She told him Mr. Blachford was a very rich gentleman, lived in a handsome house near at hand, and was very kind to her mother, an aged widow, who inhabited a small cottage close to his gate; that the occasion of her speaking to him from the window, was simply to thank him for some favours he had bestowed upon her mother; she hoped that Henry had said nothing to give him offence, for that he was a proud man, and would not put up with an affront from any body, much less from his inferiors: moreover he was a justice of peace, and dealt so rigidly with those that came under his hands, that all the parish and neighbourhood round about stood in fear and terror of him.

"He may be a justice," replied Henry, "but I'll take upon me to say he is not a gentleman. As to his business with you, Susan, or your's with him, trust me I am not curious to be informed of it: it was mere chance and accident threw me in the way to interrupt it, which if I have done to your detriment or regret, I am heartily sorry for it. As for his blustering and threatening, I fear him not, neither did I provoke him by any language improper for me to make use of to a person

of his sort; I was as humble towards him, as becomes any one human creature to be to another in the like circumstances. I respect him, however, for being kind to your mother; I only hope it is pure kindness, and that he does not look for it to be repaid by any sacrifices from you: whilst you make no other acknowledgments than you can convey to him from a window, all will be well."

This was pointed with a certain expression of look and accent, that brought the blushes into Susan's cheeks. She hoped she could not be suspected of favouring such a great, black, ugly thing as his worship, and an old fellow into the bargain; she trusted she understood herself better, than to give her company where she could not bestow her liking; in saying which, she conveyed a glance to Henry's eyes, which simplicity itself could not fail to decypher, and nothing less than predetermined virtue could be able to encounter; for, without attempting descriptions, which we do not wish to engage in, we desire the reader to take it on our word, that the aforesaid Susan May, in form and feature, was positively one of the most dangerous objects, that strong passion and weak resolution could possibly come

in contact with; she had health, youth and beauty to allure desire, and tell-tale eyes, that threw out signals of encouragement to hope.

"Upon my word, Henry," said she, "you are very considerate of my reputation, which is more than I should have expected from a handsome young fellow like you, who I dare say have sly sins enough of your own to answer for; but, to tell you the truth in one word, there is not a being upon earth I so abominate as that surly brute Justice Blachford: I believe he is as base in heart as he is black in person; therefore, with your leave, we will put him aside, and talk of something that is more to the purpose. What have you done to my drunken dame, I would fain know, that has set her in such a tantarum? There was she, foaming and fretting after you had been with her, like a mad thing: surely you did not put on that preaching face to her, as you did just now to me: you'll never have a moment's quiet in this house, if you don't keep well with the tipsey shrew that rules it: she'll ferret you out in a twinkling, take my word for it, if you thwart her, and it is not the Doctor that can save you; but if you'll coax and humour her, you may

pass your time to your heart's content; and for my share, short as our acquaintance has been, so much am I prejudiced in your favour, that as far as I can contribute to your happiness, be assured nothing in my power shall be wanting to make your life pleasant whilst we are together."

It was a look, a smile, a gentle pressure of his hand in her's, whilst she uttered these words, that gave them a grace and energy, which but for these accompaniments had not belonged to them; Susan, though not eloquent, possessed the orator's best attribute in an eminent degree; in her action she was irresistible. I know not whether I am to call it Henry's good or evil genius, that now appeared in the person of old Bridget, to draw him off to his master in his bed-chamber. He had begun a stammering kind of acknowledgment to Susan, that meant to convey something between courtesy and caution, but expressed neither one nor the other distinctly, when the plea of duty helped him out of the dilemma for this turn, but left a memento behind it, plainly intimating that flight was his best defence against such weapons as nature had bestowed on Susan: she in the mean time

was not slow to discover, both where his weakness lay, and in what her own strength consisted; what he could not term a victory on his part, she had no right to consider as a defeat on her's: chance had broken up the conference; opportunity could not be wanting to renew it.


CHAPTER VIII. A sudden Attack upon an unguarded Conscience.
WHEN Henry entered the Doctor's chamber, he found him still between the blankets, where he had provoked so copious a perspiration, that there is little doubt but he had paid interest through his pores for every drop of water he had borrowed by his throat in his rencounter with the duck. Instead of giving a strait answer to Henry's enquiries, he began to hold forth a learned lecture, upon the use and efficacy of sudorifics, reprobating in the strongest terms the vulgar error of pouring in hot liquors upon cold stomachs, which he pronounced to be a diabolical practice, and little better than slow poison, just then forgetting the glass of

brandy at the miller's. In the course of this harangue, he instanced the bad habit of Mistress Cawdle as a case in point, who he roundly asserted was dramming herself out of the world; adding, with an oath, that if Jemima was a saint, he would be bold to say she was the most drunken saint in the calendar.
Observing that Henry made no reply to this, except by a significant shake of his head, he added—"Well, well, you are a discreet lad, I perceive, and know how to hold your tongue upon occasion, but I'll bett a good wager she has been preaching to you over her cups: it is always the case when the spirit flies up into her head; but don't let her make a fool of you; one saint in a family is one too many: mind your business, ply the mortar, and leave religion to those who get their living by it: you and I, my lad, have something else to think of."


"I hope," replied Henry, "I can mind my business without neglecting my religion."


"Hark-ye, child," cried Zachary, "you talk like an ignoramus, if you suppose that we of the faculty can have any other religion than to take care of the health and constitutions of our patients. Every man in his own

way, the parson for the soul, the physician for the body. What have we to do in a church, whilst there is one man under our care in a sick bed? why, it were a shame for any of us to be seen there; it is all one as to confess that we are totally cut out of our practice; and to do my brethren justice, I must confess they seldom, if ever, come into a church but with a view of being called out of it: but that is a stale trick, and begins to be blown upon, so that every gentleman of character in the profession, who does not wish to be thought a mountebank and a quack, never lets himself be seen within the walls of a church, unless indeed he should chance to follow the corpse of a customer thither."


"And when his own corpse is carried thither to it's last home," said Henry, "what will become of him then?"—"Heh! how! what is that you say?" demanded Zachary, starting up in his bed—"I say, sir, under favour, that I am little able to argue with a person of your science; but I must think this a very serious question, and what every one of us ought to put to ourselves in good time, 'Can any man expect to find pardon after

death, who has done God no service when alive?'



"What are you talking about?" cried the Doctor: "I tell you, child, that I, Zachary Cawdle, with these very hands, have usher'd two thousand living souls into the world; and do you call that doing God no service? How many others I may have stopt from going out of it, in the course of a long and successful practice, the Lord above only knows, I have kept no account of them. I hope you don't mean to make any comparison between such a man as I am, and an idle fellow in creation, who does nothing but preach and pray."


"Far be it from me," replied Henry, "to offer at any comparison between professions, which I cannot pretend to judge of; but as I presume a good Christian is the greatest character a man can have, I humbly conceive a good and faithful minister of God's word to be no man's inferior."


"Be that as it may," rejoined Zachary, "I have had the handling of their carcases in my time, and have found some rotten wethers amongst the flock, that would hardly bear the touch: but I perceive, young man, you have got a twang of the conventicle about you, and will

forfeit my ears if you have not been canting with that boozy babe of grace my wife; but I tell you at a word I will have no saints in my service; I did not hire you to sing psalms; if you do it as well as king David, it is no recommendation to me; I told you so at first; and as to your talking to me about the other world, I forbid you ever to name it to me again; 'tis a subject that always hips me when I hear of it."

I believe I have already hinted that Zachary was somewhat inclined to the irascible, and as he had now started a topic that was apt to give certain twitches to his conscience, which were not over pleasant in their operation, he had flounced and floundered about at such a rate in his bed, whilst this busy intermeddler was at work, that he had by this time effectually repelled the perspiration, and began to be sensible of certain symptomatic innuendoes, that argued an intention in Nature to make a sudden turn from hot to cold, and in one of her freaks and fits of variety treat him with a taste of the other extreme. His teeth now began to make music, his spirits sunk, and he huddled up his head in the bed-cloaths, sighing from the bottom of his heart, as well knowing by the

tuning of the instruments before-hand what the full concert would be when it struck up in earnest.

"The Lord have mercy upon me!" exclaimed poor Zachary, "what is going forward now? I was as well but now as heart could wish; I thought no more of being taken so suddenly than the man in the moon: never trust me but I shake from head to foot; I can't stand it, positively I can't stand it, if I am to be seized in this manner. I know my own constitution to a tittle; I'm a plethoric man, the worst subject in nature for an ague and fever: Doctor Doublechin went out of the world in the same way, he took a short leave and was off; 'tis a lost case, Henry, 'tis all up with your poor master, if I can't drive the foe out of one door or the other before he gets footing in the house. For the love of Heaven, put your hand in my waistcoat pocket, and give me a small paper in a blue wrapper, which you'll find there; it contains a medicine which I never administer to my patients, because I scorn to go out of the regular practice with my friends, but when a man's own life is at stake, there is no joke in dallying: Doctor James must do the jobb, or I must beat a hasty march out of this world, and be gone."


Henry gave him the paper and some warm liquid, in which he mixed the life-restoring dose and swallowed it, giving order for some barley-water to be made, and other fit preparations for its operation.
No sooner had his attendant left the chamber than Zachary, now alone and at leisure for meditation, began to entertain serious apprehensions for the consequences of this sudden attack. The rapid progress of a sever in better constitutions than his own he had frequently been a witness to: it was an enemy whose strength he had fully experienced, having baffled him over and over; death was a consummation, which in his own case was devoutly to be dreaded, though he could contemplate it with all due serenity in the case of others; the flippant and contemptuous stile, in which he had just then been talking of the duties of religion, recoiled upon his thoughts so strongly, that his present sudden and unexpected attack struck his conscience as a judgment, and most heartily did he wish he could recall what he had been saying to Henry: in the mean time the cold fit shook him worse and worse, whilst the active medicine ran through his veins with awful omens of a crisis

coming on: he knew too well that the battle between Death and him must be a close one and a short one, for, alas! he was too fat for flight, and too fair a butt for such a marksman not to hit. Vanity might have held him up in the presence of a second person, but he could not impose upon himself; and after a deep sigh he broke forth into the following melancholy soliloquy:—"What poor miserable mortals are we, who cannot foresee what may befall us for a moment to come! Here am I shivering and shaking, and perhaps upon the bed of death, whereas but a few minutes ago I thought no more of death than I did of the pope of Rome. But, to be sure, when a man is in perfect health, it is natural for him to keep such dull thoughts out of his head: it cannot be expected that one should be musing and pondering upon the other world, when one sees no present chance of going thither; whilst things are at a distance, it is not necessary to think about them. Ah! poor Zachary, thou hast enjoyed a brave state of health and kept a merry heart till this sad moment; but art thou not an ass and a blockhead, not to recollect that all flesh is mortal? Hast thou not had dealings enough with Death to be

aware of his slippery tricks? How many hundred times has he made a fool and a false prophet of thee, by snapping up thy patients in a twinkling, when thou, silly Doctor, wast hugging thyself in the credit of a cure, and hadst pronounc'd them out of danger? And why, above all things, shou'd I be vapouring with this poor lad, and shewing off my courage at the expence of religion, which is about as wise a thing to do, as it wou'd be to pluck a sleeping bear by the beard. I know my wife to be a slut and a sot, and no more of a saint than Judas Iscariot, but what then? Because she professes more faith than she has, why should I make a boast of believing less than I do? Lord have mercy upon us! nobody knows how soon he may be call'd away; and what a misfortune would it be to be taken off just in the flush and flower of my business! If it would please God to take my wife first, it would be some comfort: I might then lead a quiet life, leave off practice, and begin to think seriously of my latter end; but, alas-a-day! I have now so many customers dying upon my hands, that I cannot in conscience neglect their affairs to look after my own. Of a certain, death is a serious

thing at the best, and I have always look'd grave at the funeral of a patient; but when it comes to be one's own case it is interesting indeed! Zooks! what a twinge in the bowels was there! Aye, aye, I feel it at work; the powder begins to stir; 'tis all for the best: the enemy is shifting his quarters. How many people might I have cur'd with this drug, if I had not had too much honour to dabble in quack medicines! If I can but shake off this fit at once and get well, I shall have plenty of time to turn over these thoughts at my leisure."

He now applied himself lustily to the bell at his bed's head, for reasons that argued the necessity of dispatch. Old Bridget heard the summons, but was not in the same necessity to obey it: when at last she presented herself at the door, the Doctor, whose anger had been up long before she was, greeted her with a salutation not very courtly, demanding why she would hobble up stairs so slowly, when she might well conceive what a hurry he was in—"Well," said she, "and now your hurry is over, what is it you want?"—"Barley-water and a bucket," cried Zachary, "as quickly as you can, for a greater turmoil than is now

in my stomach the duck herself could not make, if I had swallow'd her alive when she flew out of the bank and sous'd me in the brook."



CHAPTER IX. Doctors differ.
THERE was an old Scotchman, Alexander Kinloch by name, who officiated in the like capacity under Doctor Cawdle as Whackum did under Sidrophel. The care of the poorer patients in general devolved upon this deputy doctor, who, being an old limb of the faculty, was become so stubborn withal, that it seemed a point with him in practice constantly to take any road but that which he conceived his principal would pursue. No sooner had he been informed by Henry of his master's situation, and the medicine he had administered to himself, than, having taken two or three hasty strides about the shop, as if to give vent to his choler, he snatched down an old plaid night-gown, which hung upon a peg, and having girt it round his loins with a green worsted sash over a black cloth waistcoat, to

which he had stript himself for his work, he bade Henry look to the shop, and immediately ascended the stairs to the chamber of the invalid.
If Death had been disposed to have complimented Zachary with a visit, I question if he could have taken a better figure for his purpose than what Alexander now presented to the sick man's view, standing at the feet of his truckle bed, arrayed in his rusty plaid, tall, squalid, begrimed with the dust of the mortar, a perfect skeleton with the skin on, and staring upon him with two lack-lustre eyes, that seemed buried in their boney lockets. A stronger contrast could hardly be found in human nature than might here be seen between master and man; Zachary presenting to the eye of the spectator a rotundity of figure, which, though in the horizontal posture, as now displayed, lost little, if any thing at all, of its perpendicular elevation from a given plane; Alexander, when erect upon his feet, being in the proportion of a foot to an inch in point of altitude, when compared with the aforesaid Alexander extended on his back; in few words, the one stood in like relation to the other as the spiggot does to the tun.

Zachary had no sooner caught a glimpse of Alexander's visage over the hillock of human flesh, which intercepted nearly all the rest of his figure, and being now under the impression of a terrified imagination, than he shook in every joint, and though he recognized his old acquaintance sufficiently to be satisfied that Death was not actually present in person, yet he was far from certain that he had not visited him by proxy; and in justice to Zachary it must be confessed, that a better proxy than Alexander, Death could no where have found, nor one to whom, upon long experience of past services, he could more safely have confided a commission, either general or special.
The deliberation with which Alexander had proceeded in his survey, (for it was a custom with him to let the sick man make his own complaints, by which he spared himself the trouble of finding them out) gave the Doctor time to rally his spirits so far as to assume an air of some composure, whilst he addressed his visitor as follows:—"Ah! Sawney, you find me here in a sorry pickle."—"Aye, aye," quoth the Scotchman, "I can well enough scent the pickle you are in; you have been scrubbing your intestines with that damn'd

powder of poison, which I will maintain to be the vilest dust that ever devil blew into the brains of a mountebank."—"Verbum sapienti, friend Sawney," replied the Doctor; "I believe I know something, and I believe you are convinc'd I do; but surely you forget to whom you are talking. What you say is very right, only you say it to the wrong person: every professional man, like you and me, will hold for the regular practice, and cry down quaokcry; 'tis his duty so to do, and as for these powders, I believe neither you nor any man living can say I ever administer'd them to patient of mine since I was master of a mortar; living or dying, my customers have been always handled by me secundum artem: but the cook is not bound to eat his own porridge; neither am I, Zachary Cawdle, compell'd to take my own physic; 'tis a foolish landlord that thinks to drive a trade by drinking out his own barrel."


"Well, Doctor," replied Death's image, "since you are not to be advis'd, I shall only remind you of the old saying, 'Physician, cure thyself."
—"And I've good hope I shall cure myself," returned the Doctor, "and speedily too, for I find I am wonderfully lighter since the

powders operated."—"'Twou'd be wonderful if you were not," quoth Alexander, "considering how much of your cargo you have thrown overboard."—"Better do that than let the ship sink," rejoined Zachary; "that's a resource, friend Sawney, which we, who are full laden, have, and you, who are in ballast, have not"—"Yes, truly," quoth Sawney, "you have broke bulk with a vengeance, but by the ill savour of the hold I should doubt if you have clean bills of health on board yet. Marry, joy go with you, master of mine; if a swoln paunch, short neck, and wheezing lungs are symptoms of long life, you are blest with them to your heart's content; but I am of Aristotle's mind for that; I agree with the old sages, Hippocrates, and Galen, and Doctor Nicholas Culpepper, who, in his Last Legacy bequeath'd to his dear Consort, Mrs. Alice Culpepper, for the Public Good, recommendeth to such as be fat to eat three or four cloves of garlic every morning with bread and butter, and fast two hours after it; and he further saith, 'Let their drink be water, wherein fennel hath been boil'd, and in a very small time it will ease them."



"What tell you me of Nicholas Culpepper?" cried Zachary; "he was nothing better

than a star-gazer and a quack. Will he give me a receipt to know whether a sick man like me shall live or die of the malady he is afflicted with?"


"That he will do," cried Alexander, "by three several modes of process, and you may take your choice of which you like best."—"L
•…
 us hear'em, let us hear'em all," said the Doctor.

"Primo," replied Kinloch, " 'Shave th
•
 crown of your head, and lay upon the shaved place rue stamped with oil of roses, binding it on; and, if you sneeze within six hours after, you shall live, else not."


"Let him carry his own fool's noddle to the shaver for me," answered Zachary; "I'll have nothing to do with his rue and roses.—What next?"


'Secundo. Let green nettles be steeped in the urine of him that is sick, twenty-four hours. If they remain green and fresh, the sick will live; else it is all up with him.'


"Let him go to the devil with his nostrums," quoth the Doctor, exalting his voice; "I hope I shall live to steep the nettles upon his grave; and now, Sawney, for the third and last, and then let us have done with Nicholas and his nonsense."



"Well, well," said Sawney, with much gravity, "there are more secrets in nature than you and I have hitherto found out, but you may take them or leave them. I shall tender you but one experiment more; and let me tell you, master of mine, I should be very unwilling to put it to the proof in your case, for reasons, that I do not think it necessary to explain."—"Say you so, say you so?" cried Zachary, somewhat startled with this preamble; "then I perceive you think worse of my case than I do; but what is your experiment?"


"This it is," answered the journeyman doctor; "I give it you in Nicholas Culpepper's own words—'Tertio, Take the grease of a hog, and rub the body of any that is sick against the heart and the soles of the feet, then throw the grease to a dog; if he eat it, the sick will live; if not, he will surely die."



"Are you sure," quoth Zachary, "that you have been correct in the particulars of this notable nostrum?"—"Perfectly correct," replied Kinloch; "I can shew it to you in his book."—"Then I must own to you," said the Doctor, "it is an experiment I should not like to pledge my life upon: but some dogs

have stronger stomachs than others; does he give no directions in that particular?"—"None," replied the North Briton, "he speaks of dogs generically, not specifically."—"Then he is a booby and a blockhead for his pains," rejoined Zachary; "would he have me throw such a pellet to a lady's lap-dog, that is fed upon boiled chicken and sugared milk? The very thought of it has set my stomach a working. Get thee our of my room, good Sawney, make haste and be gone, and pr'ythee give me some chance for recovery by forbearing to prescribe to me."

The deputy doctor now departed in a huff, and left Zachary to solicit, with the help of Doctor James, a kind turn from the only better friend in sickness, sleep; but alas! though these two friendly restorers of tir'd Nature, have been seldom found at distance from each other, yet in the present case Zachary's temples could take no rest; he was tormented with a racking head-ach and a throbbing heart: all his terrors now returned, and he again applied himself to the bell at his bed's-head, ringing it with might and main.

"Law! Sir," cried Susan, as she entered his room, "what a ringing you keep! as sure

as can be, you'll wake my mistress, and what will become of us then?"—"Your mistress, quotha!" exclaimed the Doctor; "your mistress is a sow and a sot; because she went boozy to bed overnight, am I to lie and perish next morning for fear of waking her? I care not if she never wak'd again, so I were out of this torment: Pr'ythee, my good girl, can'st thou not think of something to ease me of this racking head-ach?"


"I never had the head-ach in my life," replied Susan.—"I wish from my soul you had it now for the first time, and I was quit of it," quoth Zachary. "If it plagues you so," cried Susan, "why don't you lay your head down on the pillow and go to sleep; that's the way I get rid of all my troubles."—"Get you gone for a goose," cried the Doctor in a rage, "and send old Bridget to set the room to rights."—"Foh!" quoth Susan as she went down stairs, "your head may well ach o' my conscience."


"If one of my patients," said Zachary to himself, "consulted me upon a head-ach like this, I should make nothing of it: my business would be to give nature a fair field, and let her fight her own battles: cooling drinks, with endive, succory, purslain, lettuce, or barley-water

with a little cinnamon, is the most I should administer; but for my own part, I wish to be well at once; for I have no time to spare, and I hate pain.

During this meditation, Bridget had been employed in removing nuisances; when the Doctor, recollecting nothing in his own practice, that would serve the present purpose, and that old women frequently had nostrums that make quick work of what they undertake, repeated the same question to Bridget, that he had put with so little success to Susan. Proud to be consulted by so great a man as her master, the old wench immediately demanded on which, side of his head the pain laid. "On every side," quoth Zachary, "and all over it."—"Then I can do you no good," replied Bridget: "had the pain laid on the right side, I could have cured it with a comb made of the right horn of a ram; if on the left, with one made of the left horn of a ram."—"Begone for an old fool," cried the Doctor; "if ram's horns could have cured me, I should have been well long enough ago."

Alexander Kinloch now re-entered the chamber, and with a solemn countenance informed the Doctor that he had been sent for to Mrs. Cawdle, whom he had found in her

bed, grievously afflicted with the head-ach accompanied by a high pulse, dry tongue, and other febrile symptoms. "I am glad of it with all my heart," exclaimed Zachary; "and what have you administered to her?"—"Nothing," replied Alexander, "till I consulted you; but upon inspection of the patient, I should humbly conceive there is nothing so effectual to remove her complaint as evacuation and refrigeration."—"Then set about it thyself, friend Sawney," quoth the Doctor, "for I am in no condition to do either one or the other."—"I have noted with some concern," resumed Alexander, "that the cephalaea, or head-ach, of which Madam complaineth, lieth not in the pericranium, or outward skin of the scull, but in the pia mater, or in other words in that membrane, which knitteth the senses together, and lieth round the brain within the dura mater: now it is a point agreed both by ancients and moderns, that there are various sorts and descriptions of head-achs; some possessing the whole head, others only half of it; some coming of heat, others of cold; some of dryness, others of moisture; some arising from plethory or plenitude of blood, others from choler."—

"Which will certainly be my case," cried the Doctor, interrupting him, "unless you bring your discussion to a point."—"I am hastening thereunto," replied Sawney: "there are also head-achs, which proceed from windiness; there are others caused of the stomach; there are head-achs symptomatic of fevers; and lastly, there are head-achs originating from drunkenness, to which denomination I pronounce this of Madam Cawdle's indisputably to belong."—"Who doubts it?" cried Zachary: "then why the devil didn't you come to it at once?"

Alexander gave no attention to the Doctor's impatience, but proceeded after his own manner—"Now the causes of this kind of head-ach are evident enough; for hot wines, strong waters, and inflaming potations, fill the brain with vapours, and the brain of Madam Jemima so much the more, inasmuch as I conceive it to be hot and adust by nature, having noted upon examination that her os triquetrum is close shut, and her sutoriums not remarkably open; the beating or pulsation therefore is the greater in a scull so constructed, and of course the pain: the cure therefore consisteth, as I before said, in these two things, evacuation and refrigeration."—"Humph!" echoed

Zachary, with a grunt. Alexander proceeded: "Now of the former there are various modes whereby to administer relief, the choice of which I refer to you, as presuming you best know which process of evacuation is most consentaneous to the habits and constitution of Madam your spouse."—"I beg to be excused from giving any opinion at all in the case," said the Doctor. "As for the latter," continued the nostrum-monger, "namely refrigeration, the use of which is to drive back the vapours as they ascend to the head, I would recommend oil wherein ivy-leaves have been boiled; with which to anoint the head, the temples, and the forehead."—"With all my soul," repeated Zachary, "I approve much of your ivy-leaves; they will be in their proper place upon her temples, for by my faith, Sawney, Jemima is as true a Bacchante as ever brandished a thyrsus."

Alexander had not yet run out his whole tap, and resumed his discourse once more:—"Now to prevent drunkenness in those, who are addicted to drink, is a grand desideratum in physic; yet there are many medicines bequeathed to posterity by the ancient sages for this purpose."—"But I hope you are not

going to enumerate them," quoth the Doctor, "for I am out of all patience already."—"Be it so!" answered he; "then I will confine myself to one alone, which is simply this: 'Let the person so addicted eat six or seven bitter almonds every morning fasting, drink a draught of wormwood-beer before any other potation; and let there be infused therein a small portion of the ashes of swallows burnt in a crucible feathers and all."



"Wormwood and burnt swallows!" cried Zachary, elevating his voice; "what devil of a doctor put that dose into your head? But make her take it, my good Sawney, and I'll honour you for ever."—"I fear," replied Sawney, without paying any regard to the Doctor's raillery, "that swallows being now out of season and a bird of passage, we shall be defeated in the main point of our experiment."—"Then catch an owl," rejoined Zachary, "and put him into your crucible: my life upon't he'll do the jobb as well; and hark-ye, Sawney, if you take a little modicum of the powder'd owl yourself, it may help your wits and promote wisdom."—"I'll see what can be done," quoth Alexander gravely, and departed.



CHAPTER X. One more Dose than is to be found in the Dispensary.
THE medical understrapper, who was indebted to Doctor Nicholas Culpepper's Last Legacy for every one of these nostrums, upon which he plumed himself so highly in spite of his master's irony, immediately set to work upon his embrocation of ivy-leaves and oil, a business of no great difficulty, as there was a certain mansion in the garden over-grown with that simple, and no scarcity of good Lucca oil in the cupboard near at hand: but when he came to meditate upon a succedaneum for the burnt swallows, even Zachary's proposal of the owl as a locum-tenens was a staggering consideration, as being a bird of night, whereas it was now unfortunately broad day. In this dilemma seeing Henry in the shop, he abruptly demanded of him if he was a good hand at catching an owl: the youth, supposing he was bantering him, stared him in the face, and, without giving any answer, went about his business. The compounder of medicines in the mean time cast his eyes round

the shop, as in despair of finding any substitute for his purpose, when in a lucky moment fortune threw within his ken a dried lizard hanging from the beam, which for time immemorial had been the humble companion of a stuft aligator and the egg of an ostrich.

"Aha! my little crony," cried Alexander as he ey'd the lizard with transport, "you and I must have a word together: come down, for I have spied thee in the very nick of time." This said, he unhook'd the little animal, and examined him from head to tail: he was as dry as the mummy of a patriarch; no crucible could have done the jobb more effectually; he was a perfect deodand in the hands of an experimentalist. "Thou wilt pulverize most featly," quoth Sawney, "when I have thee under the pestle; but before I consign thee to the mortar and reduce thee to dust, let me ponder upon thy properties, and do nothing without forecast and circumspection. Poisonous thou can'st not be, for though I have never eaten of thy species myself, I know that others have; I have read that thou art a delicacy, a tit-bit as I may say, at the tables of the Chinese, and if thy flesh be delicate, thy dust cannot fail to be wholesome;

nay, I doubt not but it is medicinal, a drug to my very purpose, an absorbent, a repeller, an antidote to drunkenness, for the Chinese are the soberest nation upon earth. I'll begin upon thee incontinently. But hold, hold! whither am I running? Thou hast other virtues, if I could but recollect them; there is something more about thee; something I have read in learned authors of the back-bone of a lizard; and thine, Heaven be prais'd, I perceive is perfect and entire; but whether it is recorded as a provocative to incontinency, or as a preventive, I cannot for the blood of me to a certainty recollect: upon second thoughts, I suspect thou art a stimulative; as I'm a sinner, I suspect thou art of a stirring quality, for thy tail betokeneth it. Be it as it may, I will venture upon thee, for thou art a loving little creature, and fam'd above all the reptile race for being the friend of man: therein thou wilt assimilate in property with thy patient, for truly Madam Jemima is of an amorous and most incontinent propensity."

This said, he took the animal by the tail, and with an air of triumph hurl'd it into the mortar, covering it up, as well to conceal his treasure from discovery, as to preserve it against

injury. He now turn'd his hand to the refrigerating embrocation of oil and ivy-leaves, which having put into a phial, and properly labell'd, he consign'd to Susan, directing her how to apply it to the temples and forehead of her mistress: his next business was to take six bitter almonds out of the drawer, and inclose them in a writing paper labelled according to form, and these he deposited upon the counter, reserving them as an introductory kind of preamble to his grand arcanum now in actual projection, for old Bridget had in charge to prepare the wormwood-beer, so that all hands were now busy and the work was in forwardness.
Whilst Alexander was belabouring the lizard, for it was a tough morsel, Susan had performed her part, and so plentifully had she bestowed the unction on the temples of the rubicund Bacchante, that Jemima's face, thus varnished, presented to the beholder an intire mask of crimson foyle, with the contrast of a pair of ferocious dark eyes, sparkling under the shaggy canopy of two enormous brows of the same subfuscan hue with the eyes they over-arched.
Her malady, it is true, was considerably abated, but whether it was owing to the refrigerating

mixture, or to a cordial dose of aniseed, which she had just taken, is not for my purpose to enquire. Alexander now called lustily for Susan to administer the bitter almonds, but Susan was not to be found; she had walked into the village: Bridget was busy with the wormwood-beer, and as for himself, he was still in warm action with the lizard, who shewed great antipathy to being pulverized, and made a notable defence against the incessant battery of mortar and pestle.
What was to be done? Henry was the only person unemployed, but Henry had strong objections to any errand that was to carry him into Jemima's bed-chamber. "If such be your scruples at starting," said Kinloch, "I pronounce at once you will never do for us in our way of business: we must go to all patients, and the sex of a sick person is the last thing in our thoughts: are you afraid of risquing that smooth face of your's in your mistress's room, and have you the conceit to think she will play the part of Potiphar's wife?"—"Stop your raillery," cried Henry, "and spare yourself the pains of a very clumsy attempt at being witty, till I know what my duty is, and then I shall obey it."


He stept softly up to Zachary's chamber, but finding him asleep, shut the door with great caution, and returned. Unwilling to renew an altercation with Kinloch, and finding that Bridget made altogether as light of his scruples, he took the pacquet of almonds, and having gently given notice at Jemima's door, was no less gently invited to enter it.

"I am ordered to bring you this medicine," said he, "which Mr. Kinloch has prepar'd, and recommends you to take."—"Give it me into my hand," said the dame, and at the same time taking it with one hand, and clasping his wrist with the other, she cast a look of kindness upon him, and said she did not doubt it would do her good, when tender'd to her by him, though she had no faith in any thing of Sawney's prescribing.
So saying she unfolded the paper, and to her utter surprize found that it enveloped only half a dozen almonds. "What does the fool mean by this?" cried she; "what good are these paltry things to do me? Let the old ape eat them himself," and with that she flung them away; "But you, Henry, you do me all the good in life; your presence is a cordial, that revives my drooping spirits, and whether

your master lives or dies, depend upon me, and you will have nobody to blame but yourself, if I do not prove the best of friends to you;" in the same moment she raised herself on the bolster, reaching forth her arms, as if she intended him the favour of an embrace.
Henry, who saw her eyes flashing, and her face red and shining like a ball of fire, supposed that she was in a high fever fit, and delirious: he gently entreated her to be more compos'd, whilst he ran down and call'd up those, who were better able to assist her. "Stop, I conjure you," she exclaim'd; "if you fancy me in such a state of danger, can you have the heart to leave me?"—"I will only leave you for a moment," he replied, "till I fetch Mr. Kinloch."—"Are you in your senses," said she, "to suppose that I can be comforted by the sight of sueh a scare-crow as old Kinloch? I want neither him nor his master, nor any of their potions, which I loath and detest, and hold to be the vilest trash upon earth. Had I any body about me with half a grain of sense or feeling, I should want none of their assistance. You, Henry, have a heart, or I am mistaken; you can understand what I must endure in a family like this, and can pity

me: Cou'd I bind you to me by confidence, by favours, by affection, there is nothing I would not do to recompense and reward your attachment."—"Madam," replied Henry, "so long as I receive the wages of Doctor Cawdle, you are intitled to every service I can render you, consistent with honour and my duty to him."


"What honour and what duty do you owe to him, which you are not in an equal degree bound to fulfil towards me? Nay, if you are not lost to every manly feeling, you will own that as a woman I have a superior claim to your attentions: if you are sway'd by interest, can you hesitate between me and him? If you are capable of being touch'd by a more generous passion, where can you more worthily bestow it, than on one who has no scruple to confess the impression you have made upon her heart?"


"On your heart!" cried Henry, "is it possible you can be serious in this declaration? or am I only to regard it as the wandering of a feverish delirium?"—"Regard it in no other sense," she replied, "than as the frank confession of a woman, who is above the mean practice of disguising what she feels, and

whose mind is made up to the conviction, that what nature dictates must be right."—"If that be your rule, Madam," quoth Henry, "you cannot be offended with me for adopting it; therefore, as my nature dictates to me the impropriety of holding any further conversation with you upon this subject, you will pardon me if I cut it short and take my leave."


"Perverse, provoking, obstinate, hard fate!" exclaim'd the disappointed fair, as soon as he had departed; "thus is the patience of the saints for ever exercis'd by trials and temptations. But, thanks to the Spirit, through the assistance of grace, I have withstood the importunities of the flesh; I have wrestled with the wicked one, and obtain'd the victory. Now, Jemima, thou may'st rejoice and triumph"—here she burst into an agony of passion, sobb
•…
ng and weeping after a piteous sort, the tears trickling off her greasy cheeks like water from the feathers of a duck.
Before this paroxysm was well over, Kinloch presented himself at her bed-side, gorgeously arrayed in his robe of plaid, with the dose of wormwood-beer and lizard powder ostentatiously held forth in his right hand,

whilst with the left he drew back the curtains, as if to give a greater pomp and richer flow of drapery to the introduction of his person, and of the precious contents, with which his goblet was charged.

"I have brought it," quoth the vaunting empiric, "with my own hands: a medicine of the rarest virtues; the paragon of wonder-working art; a panacea to restore exhausted nature, though she were at her last gasp."—"Is the fellow mad?" cried Jemima: "what is it you are talking about?"—"No matter, no matter," replied Alexander; "taste and try!" with that he put the dose into her hand. "What nastiness have you given me?" cried she; "and what is it to do?"—"It is," said he, "an anti-inebriating julep, a sheather of the spicula, with which inflammatory liquors trans-fix the vitals: I don't quite say it will make you immortal, but it will keep off death, though he were at the door."—"Then take it yourself, you skeleton," cried the dame; and forthwith vollied the whole contents of the potion in Alexander's face, who instantly fled out of the room, covered with the filthy mixture, sputtering and swearing he would sooner

prescribe to the whore of Babylon, than such a drunken vixen as she was.


CHAPTER XI. Meditations in a Kitchen.
WHEN Jemima was left to reflect seriously upon the rebuff she had met from Henry, and found it no longer possible to turn it to her credit by any sophistry or self-delusion that her vanity could suggest, nothing remained but to soothe herself with schemes and projects of revenge; and in the course of these meditations it naturally occurred to her, that whilst she kept so fine a girl in her service as Susan May, she would never be without a rival in her own family; and as this was not the first mortification of the sort she had encountered since that girl had been about her person, she began to think that in good policy she could not be too quick in getting rid of her. The question however had its con as well as pro, for Susan was a decoy-duck, that brought game to the net, as in the instance of the afore-mentioned Justice Blachford, who

found it worth his while to bestow many courteous attentions upon the mistress, by way of masque to his approaches in another quarter.
Although few gentlewomen in Mrs. Cawdle's circumstances would have had the condescension to be so explicit with a servant just hired into their family, yet that gracious personage, mindful, no doubt, of the time when she herself took post in that low order of society, had neither that pride of virtue nor that delicacy of sentiment about her to be wounded by reflections of this sort; faithful to her antient habits, she was in the practice of plain dealing on those occasions where other ladies use finesse, and by making her wishes well understood was sure of bringing them to a speedy issue at all events, and avoiding that most painful of all situations, a state of expectation and suspense. At the same time when those wishes were crossed and thwarted, the good lady had a due sense of her own dignity, and resented a disappointment with as much spirit as her warmest admirers could wish her to have; and never was this spirit more thoroughly called forth than at the present moment by Henry's unaccountable neglect of her most gracious advances; a circumstance that

seemed to run counter to all calculation; for who so unlikely to withstand temptation as a creature destitute of every thing, and without a friend upon earth? The greater therefore must be her mortification to find her wishes thwarted and her favours rejected by one so circumstanced, and that in a stile so peremptory and determined, as left her no hope of succeeding in any future attempt. She could not of course fail to see how much it was for her repose, as well as for her dignity, to put him out of sight by an immediate dismission, in which she had little fear of being over-ruled by her husband, who could hardly be said to have even a secondary authority in the affairs of the family.
Whilst these resolutions were forming in the bosom of the indignant dame, Henry's thoughts were employed upon measures for anticipating their execution by a voluntary secession, for it seemed to him inconsistent with propriety to remain any longer in his present service: his mind, trained in the principles of honour, and uncontaminated by impure connections, revolted from the idea of taking wages from the husband and bribes from the wife: his experience of adversity, though short,

had been severe; it had pleased Heaven to plunge him at once into distress and poverty, against the force of which his former habits and education had not furnished him with any of those resources, which men taught to labour from their birth are provided with; and of the world at large he had as little knowledge as any being could well have, who had lived in civilized society for his term of years: still he was resolute to preserve his integrity and combat his hard fortune as he could; and whereas the very same difficulties had now fallen upon him in this his second service as he had encountered in his first, he saw no encouragement to seek a place in any family, where he was liable to be entangled in the snares of the fair sex; to put himself therefore effectually out of their reach, there seemed no way so honourable as by enlisting himself in the first recruiting party he could meet: here he foresaw that those gifts which Nature had bestowed upon him would no longer lead him into embarrassments; but on the contrary might operate to his advantage: to the service of his king he determined to devote that person, which, in his present course of life, seemed likely to involve him in a continual series of

struggles and perplexities; when crowned with the cap of a grenadier, he flattered himself he should be no longer courted by any mistress but glory, and to her solicitations he might safely commit his honour and his conscience.
In the pursuit of these meditations he had already passed some solitary minutes, whilst old Bridget was occupied elsewhere; when Susan May came in from her walk to the village, and took her seat beside him. In the course of the conversation that ensued Henry did not disguise from her his intention of quitting his present service, though of his motives he did not speak; these however Susan was at no loss to conceive; the experience she had of her mistress's character, and the manner in which Henry evaded her questions, assisting her conjectures so as to give her a sufficient insight into the real cause of his disgust. She felt too strongly in her own heart the emotions which a person like Henry's was capable of inspiring, not to credit her mistress for the like sensations; she spoke of her without reserve, and pronounced upon his motives with such confidence, as soon as she understood he had attended upon her with her medicines, that though she could not bring him to confession,

she took his silence for assent, and proceeded without interruption till she had exhausted her eloquence on the subject.
When he told her of his intention to enlist, she sighed, and said she knew too well what hardships a soldier suffered, for she had had a brother in the army, as fine a young man as ever was seen, but he was now no more; he was killed at the siege of Gibraltar, in a sally upon the Spanish lines; she hoped that Henry would not run such a desperate course; for her part she did not see the necessity there was for his leaving the Doctor's service merely because her mistress had whims in her head, which, when she was more calm, would probably subside; she must own it was extremely natural that so handsome a young man should be admired by the women; it was what he must expect, go where he would, but then it was always in his power to return it or not, as his inclination prompted him; and though it was against nature to suppose he could ever throw away his regards upon such an object as her mistress, yet had it been a case where ages were suitable, and love was on both sides, she took for granted the same scruples would not have operated; for an attachment of that sort

she observed was quite another thing from selling himself to such an old cat as her mistress.

"Foh!" cried Henry, "all the money in the word would not pay me for such a sacrifice."—"No, to be sure," replied Susan, "love makes all the difference in life: every kindness that does not come from the heart costs one a pang; but to the man we love, Oh! Henry, that woman's heart must be as hard as marble who can refuse him any thing."

As she said this she leant her hand carelessly on his shoulder; it was one of those movements that intend a great deal and profess to mean nothing; but whilst she was sitting in this attitude, enveloped in the contemplation of one of the finest countenances in nature, behold! on a sudden one very little resembling it, the property of Alexander Kinloch, presented itself to her view, that learned person having silently crept into the kitchen and surprized them in their conference.

"Aha! my young spark!" quoth the interloper, "is it thus you pass your time, whilst I am toiling like a galley-slave at an oar till my fingers cling to the pestle? I have

been wanting you in the shop; here are medicines to take out, and plenty of business to be done, when you are at leisure to put your hand to it; but at present I perceive you are engaged, and in a way, let me tell you, that is more likely to make work for the Doctor than to do any."

Susan turned her eyes upon the speaker, and with a smile that would have softened the heart of Herod, apologized for Henry by taking all the blame to herself:—"I was telling him," said she, "what a kind soul you are, and what a world of knowledge he may gain from your instructions, if he will but stay amongst us; but indeed and indeed, my good Mr. Kinloch, I am afraid there will be no living in this house for any of us long, if my mistress is to go on at this rate."

This was touching the very master-string of Kinloch's mental machinery, who hated Jemima as cordially as he loved to hear his own praises. Susan had ingeniously contrived in a short compass to give him a small remembrance of both; the consequence was an instant truce between him and Henry, who was nevertheless constrained to be a patient hearer of a long and furious philippic from the journeyman

doctor, in which he belaboured poor Jemima without mercy, and not the less virulently for the affront she had so lately put upon him, when she returned the potion upon his hands, which he had compounded with such care and skill. Not that his oration consisted, like some that might be named, of one continued strain of invective, for on the contrary it was relieved every now and then with a strong dash of the panegyric, of which he was himself the sole hero, on all which occasions he took especial care to contrast the brilliancy of his own character by throwing that of his master Zachary into shade; and in truth there was no other way of bringing the weight of their respective abilities to any thing like a balance but this which Alexander adopted for making his own scale equiponderate, by borrowing from that which else would have caused him to kick the beam.
When he had pretty well exhausted the catalogue of Jemima's failings, and added a few more items to the account of his own perfections, than a less partial calculator would have discovered, the tempest of his wrath subsided into so perfect a calm, that he began

to rally the young people in a strain which he mistook for humour; and when he understood from Susan that Henry meditated a hasty retreat, he heartily joined her in persuading him not to quit the post he had taken, where such mighty advantages might be reaped by a diligent attention to the instructions he should give him, and by the opportunities he would have of seeing the art practised in its greatest perfection:—"I own to you," said he, "that there is something to get over before you can submit to serve a woman like your mistress; for whether it is your lot to fall into her good graces or her ill ones, she is equally intolerable. As for the Doctor, poor man, he is a mere cypher in the house, and pretty nearly so in his profession; the weight of that rests upon me; so that with him you will have little to do and less to learn; with me you will have enough of both: but you well know there is no learning without labour, as Aristotle wisely observes; therefore courage, my good lad, think no more of the troublesome woman above stairs, who has thrown away the only chance she had for a longer stay in this world by rejecting a medicine that might have wrought wonders in her constitution;

but she was unworthy of it, and 'tis happy for the world that I had reserv'd enough of the inestimable drug of which it was compounded to make experiment on another patient, whose case exactly tallies, being as great a sot as herself, and as far gone in the disorders incidental to that fatal propensity."

Alexander now produced a phial containing the ashes of the lizard steeped in wormwood-beer, and delivered it with many charges to Henry, directing him the strait road to the George and Dragon ale-house, where he was to give it into the hands of Dame Dunckley, the hostess, whose stomach, after all the hard services it had gone through in the course of her profession, was now destined to encounter a dose that might have discomposed the nerves of a stone-eater.
With this important commission Henry set forward towards the ale-house, and Susan, at the summons of the bell, to attend upon her mistress.

END OF BOOK THE FIRST.



BOOK THE SECOND.

CHAPTER I. Reasons for writing as fast as we can.
THOSE rules which a well-bred man lays down for himself, when he engages in the difficult task of telling a long story about persons unknown to the circle he is in, may with equal propriety be adopted by an author in the conduct of a novel: both pursue the same object, and both incur the same risque of failing in the pursuit, which certainly requires a considerable share of management and address to succeed in.
A story will infallibly disgust if it is told in vulgar and ill-chosen language; if interlarded with affected phrases, or florid descriptions, that advance no interest; if it is delivered in a pedantic laboured stile, unsuitable to characters in familiar life, if it substitutes dull jokes and ribaldry in the place of wit and pleasantry; if the teller either digresses too often from the main subject, or dwells too long and circumstantially

upon matters not sufficiently important or amusing; in short, if it fails in any of those requisites that should keep the attention wakeful and alert, it is a bad story, and the teller has wilfully brought himself into disgrace with his hearers by cheating them of their expectations and abusing their indulgence.
So is it with the novel-writer; the same faults will be punished with the same contempt.
Be the matter ever so interesting, which falls to the task of any one man to relate in public company, he will naturally be ashamed of keeping their attention too long upon the stretch; and if he cannot prevail upon other tongues to move, yet in good manners and common delicacy, he will contrive to make some breaks and pauses in his narrative, which may give relief to the ear, and some degree of relaxation to the mind. This seems generally understood by the novel-writer, who, by the distribution of his matter into books and chapters, tenders to the reader in his several stages so many inns or baiting-places by the way, where he hangs out a sign that there is rest at least to be had for the weary traveller.

An eminent author, whose talent for novel-writing was unequalled, and whose authority ought greatly to weigh with all, who succeed him in the same line, furnished his baiting-places with such ingenious hospitality, as not only to supply his guests with the necessary remissions from fatigue, but also to recruit them with viands of a very nutritive as well as palatable quality. According to this figure of speech, (which cannot be mistaken, as alluding to his prefatory chapters) he was not only a pleasant facetious companion by the way, but acted the part of an admirable host at every one of the inns. Alas! it was famous travelling in his days: I remember him full well, and despair of ever meeting his like again, upon that road at least.
Others there have been, and one there was of the same day, who was a well-meaning civil soul, and had a soft simpering kind of address, that took mightily with the ladies, whom he contrived to usher through a long, long journey, with their handkerchiefs at their eyes, weeping and wailing by the way, till he conducted them, at the close of it, either to a ravishment or a funeral, or perhaps to a madhouse, where he

left them to get off as they could. He was a charming man, and had a deal of custom, but the other's was the house that I frequented.
There was a third, somewhat posterior in time, not in talents, who was indeed a rough driver, and rather too severe to his cattle; but, in faith, he carried us on at a merry pace over land or sea; nothing came amiss to him, for he was up to both elements, and a match for nature in every shape, character, and degree: he was not very courteous, it must be owned, for he had a capacity for higher things, and was above his business: he only wanted a little more suavity and discretion to have figured with the best.
With these I shall stop; for another step would bring me into company with the living, and of my partiality for my contemporaries I am too conscious to put my judgment to the risque of criticism, which may not be over-indulgent to mistakes of the heart. Them and myself I implicitly resign to the favour and protection of those public spirited inspectors of literature, who undertake the laborious task of reviewing every thing we write, and who understand so well the policy of the wise Lacedaemonians, that no sooner do they light

upon a deformed or ricketty bantling, but they charitably strangle it outright, and don't let it survive to disgrace us with posterity. This is mercy to the age at large, though any one of us, upon whom it falls, is apt to call it cruelty, when we are sent to the trunk-maker and the pastry-cook to drive the best bargain we can for our property, before it is turned over to the worms, who then only take us into reading when nobody else will: but such is our obstinacy notwithstanding, that it seems as if we spitefully wrote the more in contradiction to our real friends, who fairly tell us we cannot write at all.
However, at the very worst, we can always draw this consolation from our faults, that our kind correctors have had infinite pleasure in finding them out; for surely if the discovery gave pain, no man would voluntary engage in the search.
There is also another cheering reflection we have to feed upon, which is, that those authors, who shall follow us in point of time, will fall short of us in point of merit. Homer himself tells us this, who, as an Epic poet, was surely interested to hold up his heroes as high as he could, and yet is compelled to confess

that the pelting they bestowed upon each other was but children's play compared to what their fathers could do at that sport. Now it is clear, that from Homer's day to the present hour there has been a gradual falling off in the human powers, mental and bodily; from which I infer that the novel last written may always be presumed the worst that ever was written; and therefore that it behoves every writer, and myself amongst the rest, to write as fast as ever we can, for the longer we are about it the worse it will be. And this reminds me that I ought to bring this chapter to a conclusion, and attend to the history, which, in the mean time, has been standing still, and cannot profit by a pause.


CHAPTER II. The History goes to the Alehouse.—Bella, horrida bella!
AT some distance from the house of Doctor Cawdle, and in the centre of the village, there was a spacious green, round which the cottages were scattered in irregular groupes, and amongst these the habitation of Alexander

Kinloch's patient, conspicuously distinguished by the effigies of the heroic saint of England bestriding an enormous dragon. Hither Henry bent his course, charged with the inestimable potion, and casting a look upon the sign for security's sake, thought himself sufficiently warranted to enter the house without further enquiry, all possible scruples being satisfied by the information of the following ingenious distich:—

Nathaniel Dunckley liveth here;
Turn in, good friend, and taste my beer.


He found the host and hostess in the kitchen, with three or four guests assembled over their liquor: the lady, who was destined to entomb the ashes of the lizard, was seated in a wicker chair by the chimney side, contemplating a few weeping sticks, that were bewailing their sad fate on the hearth. When Henry was certified as to the person of the patient, and had discharged himself of his commission by delivering the dose into her hands, he was called upon to give answer to a string of enquiries, which the curiosity of the good dame prompted her to make upon the sight of a stranger, for whose appearance as servant to

Zachary she could not account, the news of that event not having reached her ears. How long had he been with Doctor Cawdle? Where did he come from? What was his name? The very little intelligence she gathered from these questions did not discourage her from still going on to ask—If he knew what the stuff in the phial was? Did he make it up, or did Kinloch?—Kinloch made it up, and he knew nothing about it.—By this time she had drawn the cork, and was smelling to it.—"Phoh!" cried the dame, "a dog would not swallow this: what does he mean by sending such poisonous stuff? carry it back to the old Scotchman, and bid him take it himself, for I'll have none of his nastiness."—"Pardon me there," replied Henry; "I carry out physic from the Doctor, but I bring none back."


"No, no," cried Nathaniel, the landlord, "that would be carrying coals to Newcastle, as the saying is; you are in the right there, my lad: I see you are a knowing hand, and have got your lesson already. Pr'ythee, where did you live before our doctor hir'd you? I warrant you are a Londoner."—"I suppose it can little concern you to know from whence I come," replied Henry, "but I am no Londoner: I

have done my errand, and I believe that is all that need pass between you and me for the present."—"By the living," repeated Nathaniel, "you are a deep one; I warrant me you have been at question and answer before now, and will be again ere long; but have a care our justice don't lay his fingers upon you; 'fore George, you'll find it no easy job to get out of his gripe."

Amongst the people, who were drinking, there was one in a sailor's jacket, who went by the nickname of Bowsey, a bold and resolute fellow, who occasionally used the sea, and at intervals returned to his parish to make waste of his earnings, and raise what contributions he could upon the neighbourhood, by snaring game, or any other pilfering and illegal depredations, which he could turn his hand to. This Bowsey was the terror of all his industrious neighbours, and the favourite of all the idle ones. No man handled a fighting cock like Bowsey; and at the country races he hawked about lists of the sporting ladies with universal applause; at fairs and markets he cried gingerbread and sung ballads with equal eclat; at boxing matches he was in his element, and bottle holder general to all bruisers;

in nine-pin allies, foot-ball, hustle-cap, and every drunken gambling sport or fray, Bowsey was without an equal.
This ingenious person, whose attachment to Justice Blachford was pretty much of the sort with what the devil is vulgarly said to have to holy-water, had no sooner heard the landlord out, than turning to him with an angry look and surly voice, he reprimanded him for his contemptuous treatment of a stranger, who had given him no offence, demanding of the company round, if any man had a right to be called a rogue, till he was found out to be one.—A nod of assent from the tiplers present encouraged him to proceed.—"And who but a scandalous fellow would go about to blast a poor lad's character for nothing but because he would not plead to your damn'd impertinent questions? And why threaten him with Justice Blachford? We all know what he is: many an honester man than himself has he committed to prison."—"Have a care, Master Bowsey," quoth the landlord, "what you say of Justice Blachford; keep a good tongue in your head, if you are wise, for his worship, let me tell you, has long ears."—"Yes," cried Bowsey, "and sharp

eyes after every young wench in the neighbourhood; we all know well enough that he has his lurchers and spies about day and night, so that a man can't stir a hand, but he has his setters upon him; if you said a word, friend Dunckley, he would stop your licence, and rob you of your livelihood, therefore you are in the right to be wary; but I value not his favour at a rush; what I say, I'll say to his face." Then turning to Henry, who stood beside him, he exclaimed, "Come, my hearty fellow, don't be cast down by any thing they say; keep a good heart, and set them at nought, for I am your friend, and let me see the man, who dares to affront you."

These words were scarce out of his mouth, when a company of young men entered the alehouse kitchen in a riotous manner, amongst whom was Tom Weevil, the miller's son, whom Henry had the scuffle with at the ford. The death of his dog, and the disgrace he fell into on that occasion, still rankled in his mind, and he had now set out with a full resolution to wreak his vengeance upon his antagonist, for which purpose he had brought a parcel of his cronies to back him: with these fellows he had been taking a cup to give a spur to his

courage, and put spirits in him for the encounter. No sooner, therefore, had he set eyes upon the object of his resentment, than he began to assail him in the most opprobrious terms, bestowing many hard names upon him, and challenging him to fight it out fairly on the green before the door.
The meekness of Henry's expostulation had no other effect, than to provoke a torrent of oaths and defiances, repeated in language the most insulting, and echoed by his colleagues, who played the part of chorus to the leading strain. Nathaniel Dunckley, the host, who had been an approving hearer of all the foul words, which the miller had so liberally bestowed upon the unoffending stranger, and who was well disposed to put the worst interpretation upon his patience, now began to triumph in his turn, and to plume himself on his sagacity in having spied out the traces of a rogue in the most innocent countenance in nature. In the mean time Bowsey, who had not the smallest objection to a battle, especially where he was not to be principal, began to exalt his voice amidst the uproar, and to bluster in behalf of the weaker party, whom he now declared to be his friend, and one that

he would second, if he wou'd turn out against Weevil, whom he retorted upon with the more acrimony, as owing him an old grudge on past accounts.
The young miller, who found himself in a strong majority, and well backed by every body about him, answered Bowsey in his own strain, telling him, that he knew well enough why he was so spiteful against him, because he had caught him at his pilfering tricks, and destroyed the trimmers and thief-nets he had set in the river; "but I give you fair warning, my master," added he with an oath, "that the very next time I trap you at that sport, you shall swing for it like a rogue as you are."

Bowsey, not the less galled by this charge for knowing it was true, grew furious with rage, and shaking his fist at him in a threatening attitude, bade him take heed what he said, for though he was now in the midst of his myrmidons, the time would come when he should find an opportunity to make him repent of his vapouring, which, he might depend upon it, should not go unrevenged. "Shame upon you!" cried dame Dunckley, from the chimney corner, "would you go to

murder the young man for speaking the truth? Take notice, neighbours, and remember what he says: 'tis a pity but the justice heard it." The justice did not hear it, but there were some who did, and as his house was no further off than across the green, the hint, if well understood, had not far to travel, and there is reason to think it found the road thither very speedily, and without any loss by the way.
Henry, who found himself unintentionally a witness to conversation, for which he had no relish, was in the very act of retiring out of company, when his challenger caught him by the arm, and in a bullying tone peremptorily demanded if he would turn out like a man, and set to upon the green, or sculk like a coward from a fair proposal, and be kick'd about the house. This was seconded by a loud shout from the party, and even Bowsey seemed abashed, being awed into silence by the prospect of half a score stout cudgels, brandished in the air, and ready to execute any kind of vengeance, that might be required of them by the champion of the gang.

"You may quit your hold of me," said Henry to the miller, "for I shall not run

away from any man, who threatens me with a kicking. If you really mean to put it into execution, I hope these gentlemen at your back will leave you to yourself, and not assist in the doing it: they may shout on your side, and brandish their sticks as much as they please, but even that is not very manly, considering I am here a stranger, and without a friend, except this single man, who seems to have drawn himself into danger and ill will, by taking part with the weaker side, and standing forth in my defence. Whether I deserve this treatment for what pass'd between us at the mill, you may ask your own conscience; I shall make no appeal to a company like this, who seem determin'd to bear me down, right or wrong, by noise and numbers. Take notice, Mr. Weevil, that if I was one of those, who make boxing a science, I shou'd be warranted in declining your challenge, for you are in all respects above my match, heavier, and stronger, and taller than me; but, nevertheless, if you are determined to have me out, don't be at the trouble of kicking me, for that may be fatal to one of us in a room like this, and probably not very pleasant to the mistress of the house: go forth into the green,

chuse your ground, and I'll take my chance for a beating, rather than be kick'd into courage, which is a discipline I am not used to, and have no stomach for."

A murmur ran through the crowd, that would have been applause, if there had not been something nearer to their hearts, than justice or generosity. The young miller stept forward, and drawing a canvass purse out of his pocket, emptied it's contents upon the table, in gold and silver, to no trifling amount, and vauntingly called upon Henry to stake all, or any part, of the amount upon the battle. When this was altogether declined on the part of Henry, he gathered up his cash again, while dame Dunckley from her wicker chair, like the Pythia from her tripod, prophetically exclaimed, "What shou'd you fight for, ye foolish boys? mind, if you don't draw the justice out of his den upon you both." The voice of divination was not heard; the die was cast for battle, and forth rushed the whole company upon the green.
Now Bowsey was in his element: provided with a bottle of water in one hand, a coloured handkerchief and a lemon in the other, he fallied forth upon the field of battle, taking his

champion under the arm, and as they walked apart from the crowd, whispering many sage instructions in his ear, where to place his blows with best effect, and pointing out certain vital parts, where a well-directed stroke might effectually disable his antagonist, and ensure the victory. In this however the professor and the pupil did by no means agree: vengeance rankled in Bowsey's breast; courage and humanity held divided empire in the heart of Henry. "Be content," he replied, "I'll foil him without maiming him; he is more than half tipsey, and will be out of breath in a few minutes; t'wou'd be a sin to hurt him: boxing has been a kind of boyish exercise with me, and I never yet practis'd it in wrath, much less with mischief and rancour in my mind: my aim will be to avoid his blows, and let him beat himself."—"Don't make too sure of that," replied Bowsey; "I know his way of fighting, for I have taken a round or two with him myself; he strikes as hard as the kick of a horse."—Henry now took off his jacket, and recollecting a large clasp-knife, which he wore in the side pocket of his breeches, delivered it to Bowsey, observing that it might hurt him in his falls:

and being now divested of all weapons but what nature had given him, he advanced cheerfully to the ring, where his brawny opponent, like another Goliath, stood encircled by his Philistines, and whom he now approached with a complacent smile, tendering him his hand, and saying,—"Come, miller, let us be friends before we set to; I hope you bear no malice, and will shew yourself a brave fellow by giving me fair play." Insensible to the humanity and mildness of this address, the other, with a savage ferocity, bade him take his ground, for he should give his hand to no such vagabond as he was.
The temper of our hero, milky as it was, could ill brook this aggravating insult: the colour mounted to his cheeks, his spirit sparkled in his eyes, and darting a contemptuous look at his antagonist, he silently stept back to his ground, and posting himself in the centre of the ring, with clenched fists, braced muscles, and frowning brow, the juvenile athletic, terrible in his beauty, presented to the sight of the surrounding rustics a figure and attitude, which the statuaries of Greece, in the brightest aera of the art, might have been emulous to study.

The onset now began, which was to bring the contest between brutal strength and skillful agility to an issue. The sturdy blows of the miller, which seemed to menace his opponent with extinction, were so artfully warded that they served no other purpose, but to waste his strength and exhaust his breath. Furious and implacable in his rage, he still continued to advance, and press upon his more wary antagonist; till Henry, who kept a steady eye upon every movement of his foe, no sooner spied an opening, than he sprung within his guard, and with a blow, which seemed to have the force, as well as swiftness, of lightning, laid him prostrate on the turf. Bowsey leapt upright and smote his hands for joy: the hostile phalanx gave a groan, whilst their fallen champion was slowly raised from the ground by his seconds. Had not Henry's patience been urged by the insult above related, it may well be doubted if he would have plied his advantage either so forcibly, or in a part so sensible to injury as the throat; but repeated provocations had roused a spirit, which could hardly be said to have a tincture of gall, and he now contemplated his fallen foe with pity and regret.

The miller, however, did not keep him long in painful suspence; the blood, which flowed freely from his nostrils, by the violence of the shock upon the ground, relieved him from the stupor that at first possessed his senses, and by the assistance of his seconds he was again upon his legs, and in a posture to renew the battle; but so miserably crest-fallen was this vaunting braggart, and so confused and off his guard, that the generous victor, though repeatedly urged by Bowsey to follow up his advantage, would not avail himself of it to the utmost; so thoroughly was his resentment allayed, that he warned him more than once to keep a better guard, or give over fighting: and now not only Weevil's seconds, but his whole party, grew outrageous, and kept no order in the ring, thronging round the combatants, and shouldering Henry in a most unfair and riotous manner. It therefore became necessary for him, in self preservation, to make a short battle of it, and a second blow, placed centrically between the eyes, laid his adversary a second time at his length upon the ground, totally disqualified for another onset.
An uproar of voices now ensued, some running to the beaten party, whilst others were

laying about them with their sticks, and would probably have demolished both the conqueror and his second, had not peace been proclaimed by the authority of the worshipful Justice Blachford, attended by his second, the constable, who instantly proceeded to fulfil his orders, by arresting the only innocent person in the affray, dragging Henry to the stocks, who, being sprinkled with a pretty large portion of the miller's blood, and surprised in the very act of knocking him down, might have biassed the judgment of a more equitable magistrate than he had now to deal with.
Bowsey, being an old offender and a bold talker against Blachford, was sentenced also to the same place of durance with his principal, though he made many efforts to assert his innocence, which his worship lent no ear to, delivering him over to his sentence with the voice of authority, whilst he went growling, like a bear to a stake, amidst the hisses and hootings of the whole village mob, who were there assembled.



CHAPTER III. A Story gains by telling.
THERE is not a minister of state, general, or potentate upon earth, who keeps so many couriers, or employs them so much, as a certain busy body called Fame: to all quarters of the compass her emissaries fly at one and the same instant; there is no stop with them for the penning of dispatches; they want no written evidence of the news they carry, but away they post with word-of-mouth intelligence, which gathers as it goes, every tongue that repeats it adding, something to the tale, till such a cluster of falshoods are wound and woven round one small atom of original truth, that you may as soon find a grain of wheat in a bushel of chaff, as search for fact amongst the fictions that envelope it. It was however so short a stage from the village-green to the house of Zachary, that the courier, who came post with the tidings of Henry's fight, had so little time for his invention to work in, that he had done little or nothing to the improvement of the truth, except killing

the miller, and sending Henry to prison in fetters for the murder.
With these slight advantages in point of effect the story found its way to the ears of Alexander Kinloch, just as he was in the act of punishing the sins and offences of a rotten grinder in the jaw-bone of a patient, by lugging out its guiltless neighbour, which being sound and strong, and an useful servant withal, came so unwillingly out of his socket, that he brought part of it away with him as a proof of his attachment to his duty.
Alexander had a gift of foreseeing things after they had come to pass, which I take to be a true definition of the second sight; he therefore heard the tidings of Henry's fate with no other remark, than that he thought how it would be; but as the operation he was engaged in was a work of charity, and the patient of course not entitled to a grievance, he left him to reconcile himself to the mistake as he could, and retired into the kitchen, where old Bridget was occupied in her culinary concerns.

"Here's a pretty kettle of fish, o' my conscience," cried Alexander, as he entered the kitchen.—"What's the matter with the

fish?" replied Bridget, as she was flaying an eel; "I'm sure they are all leaping alive, and will hardly let me strip their skins off, foolish things, wreathing and wriggling about at such a rate."—"I told you how it would be," continued the prophet.—"I have no need to be told of that," quoth the dame; "they are always the plague of my life, teazing creatures!"—"When the Doctor brought this no-name fellow amongst us, I predicted what would follow, and now he has murdered a man, and must swing for it: Justice Blachford has sent him loaded with irons to the county gaol."—"What are you talking of?" cried Bridget, (laying down her knife, and leaving the poor eel under operation in much the same mangled state as Alexander had left his patient) "is our young Henry a-going to be hang'd?" This drew forth the whole narrative, revised and corrected, with notes, and an ample commentary, by the editor, Alexander Kinloch.—"Well, for a certain," said Bridget, at the conclusion, "there was something in his look that boded ill luck, and now it is come out. As sure as can be, he'll be hang'd in chains at the door, and then who can live in the house, (not I for one) when he is dangling on a gibbet

in full view of the windows?" Then, feigning to listen, she exclaimed, "Hark! sure I hear my mistress's bell," and immediately posted up stairs.
As soon as she set foot in her mistress's chamber she began—"What a terrible thing it is to take fellows into a house that nobody knows! Wou'd you believe it, Madam! this lad that master pick'd up at the statutes, and that kill'd miller Weevil's dog in such a barbarous fashion, has now kill'd young Tom, the owner of the dog."—"What do you tell me?" exclaimed Jemima. Susan was in the room, but struck with horror, stood in speechless amaze.—"I tell you what is true" answered Bridget; "the murdered man is at this very moment lying stone dead at his full length upon the town-green; they say there was never beheld so shocking a spectacle: Kinloch saw him with his own eyes; and there are the poor unhappy father and mother weeping and wailing over the corpse, and tearing their hair off their heads for very madness. Every body says that the murderer will be hang'd at our door in chains, and that you know is a dismal sight, and will drive every soul, gentle and simple, from the house; but what can be

done? the law will take its course, and Justice Blachford has pronounced sentence of death upon him already, and sent him loaded with iron fetters, hand and foot, in a hangman's cart, to the county gaol."

Here Susan gave a deep sigh, sunk down upon a chair, pale as ashes, and threw her apron over her face.

"What ails the fool?" cried Jemima, "was he too one of your sweethearts, that you take on so about him? Can no young fellow show his face within the house, but you must be instantly laying out to make prize of him? I warrant you fancy yourself a beauty! a pretty fancy, truly! a precious conceit, o' my conscience! But hark ye, Bridget, you have not told me how this murder came to pass."—"Why, that's the worst part of the story," replied the news-carrier, "for every body allows that they quarrell'd about the dog, and that poor Tom Weevil spoke kindly and civilly to Henry, and wou'd fain have made it up with him, but all to no purpose; fight he would, and swore vehemently that he would have his blood; nothing less than his life would content him."—"'Tis a lie as false as hell,"

cried Susan, bursting into a vehemence of speech; "Henry never swore; Henry never thirsted for blood; Henry never strove to take the life away even of a fly, much less of a fellow creature: if ever Heaven created a human being without fault or failing, Henry is that being; the kindest, gentlest, meekest, mercifullest!—Oh, Bridget, you must have a heart of stone to talk in such a stile!"


"How now, minx," cried Jemima; "who talks in a stile to be asham'd of but yourself? And how dare you, I would fain know, insult my ears with your blasphemous oaths and imprecations, telling the poor woman, before my face, that 'tis a lie as false as hell? Have a care what you say about that place of torment; those who are so free to send others thither are generally the first to go to it themselves. I know you, hussey! I know you to be carnal-minded and void of grace; therefore begone, for I will harbour no such reprobates in my house!"


"I do not intend you shall, Madam," replied Susan, "so you may save yourself the trouble of warning me out of your service: you may give me what bad names you please; I hope my character will not depend upon

your report; and though I may be void of grace in your way of thinking, I am not void of pity and compassion, which you seem to treat as folly and offence. When you say that you know me, Madam, you certainly mean to insinuate that you know more of me than is good and praise-worthy; permit me to say that I know you also; and though I am not bound to praise you, I shall never violate the duty of a servant by betraying you. As for all that Bridget has been telling you about Henry, I don't suppose she believes it herself; for nobody that had been half the time in his company that she has, short as that has been, could give credit to the tale that she has been relating; and I would only ask you, Madam, whether you considered him as a villain and a murderer when he attended upon you this morning with your medicine: I am pretty well convinc'd you did not treat him as such, nor shrink from his touch, as you would have done, had you thought there was an assassin at your bed-side."

This was one more secret in Susan's bag than Jemima was aware of: for a short space her confusion robbed her of words; she even debated within herself whether she would not

do well to make a quick turn, and compromise all differences; but before this resolution could be formed, the object of it was lost; Susan had vanished out of her sight like a spirit; passions stronger than interest had possession of her heart: indignation, terror, pity, love added wings to her speed, and she ran, or rather flew, to the fatal spot, where Bridget had laid the scene of her fable, resolute to sacrifice every wordly enjoyment, present or in prospect, rather than abandon Henry in his distress.
As she approached the town-green, where the tale-bearer had painted the horrid spectacle of the murdered man stretched on the earth, and surrounded by his weeping friends, her knees trembled under her, her heart palpitated, and her breath was lost: with difficulty she reached the dreaded spot, and eagerly cast her eyes around; but all was solitude and silence; the crowd had dispersed, the stocks were not within view, and nobody was stirring on the green: the prospect was auspicious to her hopes; the improbability of Bridget's report became more glaring, and her spirits gathered strength to support her on her way to the house of the Justice, where she assured

herself, that either Henry would be found, or such intelligence obtained as she could depend upon.
Here then we shall leave her to her enquiries, and attend upon our hero in his misfortunes.


CHAPTER IV. A Key to unlock the Stocks.
WE now return to Henry, whom we left in a situation of security against escape, being fast locked by the leg, and side by side with his partner in affliction, Bowsey; companions as ill matched as ever fortune brought together in the same predicament. Henry, all patience, unmoved by the mockeries and gibings of the mob, calm and collected; Bowsey, full of rancour and revenge, in sullen silence brooding on the horrid thoughts of robbery and murder, inspired into his mind not only by the menaces of Weevil, but by the sight of the money, which he ostentatiously displayed upon the challenge; at length, after a long meditation, turning a look, in which every evil passion was expressed, upon his partner in disgrace, he began

to vent himself in the following manner:—"A pretty son of a b—ch of a justice, to lay us by the heels in this fashion for nothing at all! What have I done to be set in the stocks, whilst that rascally miller goes at large? but it is a true saying, that one man may better steal a horse than another look over a hedge. You would not be advis'd by me, or you would have done that cowardly sneaker's business in another guess way: a villain! to vapor over me; to threaten me with the gallows; but I'll be reveng'd of him before this night's at an end; if once I get my foot out of this hole, I'll be up with him, I warrant me; and if you'll stick by me, my hearty fellow, we'll give him something to remember us by, and be off to sea in a twinkling."


"I believe," replied Henry, "he has got enough to remember us by already; and I should guess he will have no stomach for a second trial of the same sort. If he had not put me out of all patience by his insolence, I would not have plied him with such hard blows, at least not in such dangerous places, be assur'd."

Bowsey here fixed his eyes upon Henry, and with a share of astonishment, exclaimed, "Pr'ythee, friend, are you a quaker, or a

methodist preacher? or, in the devil's name, what are you? for I cannot for the blood of me understand what you would be at. You don't seem to want mettle when you are put to it; but you talk as if you had no heart to revenge yourself upon an insulting rascal, who bullies you into fighting with him, and then claps you into the stocks for doing yourself justice. If you will put up with such things, I will not; I know him for a pitiful peaching rascal; that fellow has the spite of the devil in him; if he could, he would hang a man for only taking a gudgeon out of the water; a knave that goes prowling and lurching about all night to pick up informations for the justice, and that makes him such a favourite, for

•…
, with his worship; but I'll favourite him if I catch him; I should think no more sin and shame of knocking him on the head, than I should in shooting a mad dog; for why? every body will allow that an informer is the vilest of wretches, and that it is as good a deed as to drink, to put such a villain out of the world.


"Hold there," cried Henry, interrupting him, "for if you know what you say, and mean to execute your threats, I shall not scruple to take upon myself that very character you hold

in such abhorrence, and inform against you, as I would against any man whom I suspected of harbouring a design upon the life of a fellow creature: horrible idea! monstrous iniquity! to bear such devilish malice in your heart as to talk of revenging yourself upon this poor fellow by killing him, and that with as little remorse as you would destroy a mad dog, of all animals the most mischievous. Where can be your conscience to meditate upon such wickedness, though I am persuaded you have too much dread of the gallows to carry it into execution? What, if he has done you an ill turn with the justice, cannot you forgive it like a christian? cannot you pa
•…
 it off like a man? But are you sure you did not deserve to be informed against? If he caught you in any illegal practices, ought he not to put the laws in force against you? and which party is in the fault, you that break the laws, or he that enforces them? If the fish of the stream are private property, (which is more than I know) you perhaps knew better, and had no right to take them; in that case it was a robbery, and you subjected yourself to being punished as a pilferer and a thief. Perhaps it is his duty to protect the fishery from plunder; perhaps he is paid for guarding the water upon which he

lives; and would you have a servant betray his trust, and turn accomplice with the thief that comes to rob his master? shame upon such principles! if these be the motives for your revenge, depend upon it, this punishment, which you are now suffering, will be the least, but not the last, that you are destined to."


"Damn you for a puritanical preaching son of a b—ch," cried Bowsey, in a rage; "is this your way of treating the only friend that stood by you, when no soul was on your side? Is it thus you serve me like a flincher as you are? For whose sake but your's, I would ask, am I in this hobble, with the devil to it? Who drew me into this premunire but yourself, and your curst, sneaking, half-begotten quarrel, when I stood forth on your side, and made you fight it out like a gentleman? Who provok'd that thief of a miller to vent his spite upon me, and to threaten me with informations, but yourself? Didn't the blustering rascal draw out his purse in my very face, and throw it full of gold and silver on the table, purposely to vapour over me with his riches, and to shew me and every body else what he got by his pitiful trade of informing? And do you think any man living can bear such treatment from a purse-proud scrub like him?

What do you take me to be? but it's no matter; I have done with you; I wash my hands of such a scurvy companion; I have stood up in your cause, when nobody else would; I have fought your battles, because I thought it the part of a man of honour to take the weaker side; and thus am I treated by you for it; but I am rightly serv'd.—Honour and honesty are but names, and as for gratitude, damn me, if there is such a thing left amongst mankind."

This dialogue would probably have been kept up some time longer, had it not been cut short by the intervention of a rescue in the person of the constable, accompanied by Susan, who came running out of breath to Henry, with the joyful tidings of his instant liberation. That generous youth had no sooner heard sentence of emancipation pronounced in his favour, and understood that it was not to extend to his fellow prisoner, than he absolutely protested against availing himself of it upon such partial terms. The constable stared with astonishment, and declared it to be a new case; that his powers extended no further than to the person of Henry; and that there must be a fresh application made to the justice, if he persisted in so unnatural a resolution.


"It may seem unnatural to you," said Henry, "who, perhaps, are of the same opinion with my companion in disgrace, who asserts that there is no such thing as honour or gratitude left in the world; but as my ill fortune involved him in a punishment, that, in the present instance, he does not merit, I scorn to avail myself of any good fortune, wherein he does not share; it is therefore to no purpose to unlock your stocks, for I shall sit with my foot in this hole so long as his remains imprisoned in the other, be it for what time it may."—Observing Susan to look disconsolate at these words, he added, "Don't suppose, Susan, I am the less sensible of your kindness, because I cannot profit by it on these conditions; be assured I receive it as a mark of your friendship and good opinion, which I shall ever gratefully bear in mind, whatever may befal me."

Susan turned aside to wipe away a tear, and at the same time Justice Blachford appeared in view on the other side of the green; for the stocks were so situated as to have the green in view, though not discoverable by Susan in her way to the Justice's house. That friendly girl had too much experience of Henry's inflexibility in points of honour not to despair of overruling

it, so that she instantly set forth in pursuit of Blachford, to make a second effort on his heart, and finish the good work she had as yet but half accomplished. Whether she was indebted to his worship's humanity, or to her own address, for the ease with which she now obtained her suit for the release of both parties, we shall not at present divulge, but certain it is, that Henry's point of honour in stickling for his companion's release was, by circumstances which thereafter happened, employed as one amongst many reasons for involving him in the severest trial innocence could be exposed to.
As soon as Bowsey was set free, he reached his hand to Henry, gave him a hearty shake, and protested aloud with an oath, that he was a brave fellow, and staunch to his friend; adding, that he would stand by him to the last drop of his blood, and if he had said any thing to the contrary in his passion, he was now convinced of his error, and was sorry for it; then tucking his cudgel under his arm, without a word to any other person present, silently marched away; the constable, with a significant shake of his head, muttering something to himself about evil company and the gallows, which seemed pointed equally at the party absent and the party present.

There was a disorder in Susan's person and deportment that could not escape the notice of Henry; her dress dishevelled, her cheek flushed, her eyes red and swoln, every thing bespoke the trepidation of her mind. Impatient to be informed of Henry's real situation, she found occasion to put some questions to him in a whisper (for the crowd was now collecting about them) relative to his treatment of young Weevil; but what was her astonishment when she heard the truth expounded to her in a few words, and understood how grossly the affair had been exaggerated, not only by Kinloch and Bridget, but no less so by Blachford himself, who had set it forth to her in most dark and dismal colours: "Oh! the villain! the base treacherous villain!" she exclaimed with uplifted hands and eyes. But now the villagers had got round them in considerable numbers, and kept a watchful eye upon every motion of Susan, whose anxiety for Henry's liberation had roused both their curiosity and suspicion; for as this girl was a poor woman's daughter of the same parish, and had been raised from a very lowly station to such an one, as enabled her to set off a very pretty form in smart and elegant apparel, she had many

enviers amongst her own sex, who were ready prepared to let loose the venom of their tongues upon her. This was well understood by Henry, who resolved, if possible, to disappoint their malice, and therefore kept such a guard over his behaviour towards his benefactress, as should afford no grounds for their censure. He therefore declined her invitation to her mother's cottage, and would not enter into any private conversation, notwithstanding all her hints and contrivances for drawing him aside, contenting himself with general expressions of thankfulness, which he took care should be heard by all about him; and though the prudence of this reserve did not meet the warmth of Susan's heart, yet it was well calculated to save her from the taunts of her neighbours: awed as she was by the distance of his behaviour, knowing withal the firmness of his resolutions, she suffered him to leave her without any other effort to detain him than what was expressed in the silent sorrows of the eyes.
He was now once more cast upon the world a helpless solitary wanderer, not knowing whither to direct his steps, nor where to resort for a livelihood by the labour of his

hands. A stranger to the country, he knew no road, but that he had passed over to and from the town where Doctor Cawdle had hired him. Resolute to remain no longer in the house with Jemima, he was no less determined not to expose the reasons he had for quitting it. To the neighbouring market-town he therefore proposed to bend his course; from thence he could write a few lines to his master, by way of farewel, and in thankfulness for his favours; there also he had hopes of falling in with some recruiting party in which he might enlist. The pittance he had in his pocket did not promise him any long support, yet it sufficed to keep immediate distress out of sight.
As Zachary's house was by the road side, he took a circuit through the fields, at the back of it, and as he was on his way, chance (whether good or ill, time may reveal) threw him upon the very spot, where Susan was sitting at the root of a tree, in a most solitary place and disconsolate attitude, giving vent to her tears, and meditating upon the very object who now stood before her.
Henry well knew the interest he had in her thoughts; and those reasons that would have

led a man of less delicate principles to throw himself in her way, operated upon him for avoiding her. In the present case, this was impossible; surprised into an interview, and in a place where their conference seemed secure from observation, he neither attempted, nor probably had at that moment a wish to escape from her.


CHAPTER V. An Opportunity not improved.

"AH! Henry," cried Susan, rising from her seat, and casting a tender melancholy look upon him, "how cou'd you be so cruel as to quit me without a word? Am I so indifferent to you, or has my anxiety for your safety made me troublesome? I perceive you are even now uneasy in my company; and 'tis clear that I am indebted to mere accident for meeting you at all."—She then proceeded to tell him that she had left her service, and repeated the substance of her last altercation with her mistress, which led to that event; she dwelt much upon the shock she had received

by Bridget's aggravated account; nor did she spare for reproaches against Blachford on the like account, who had tortured her feelings for the mean purpose of enhancing the merit of setting him at liberty.—"But all these sorrows," added she, "put together, are little to what I suffer'd, when you coldly turn'd your back upon me in the face of the whole village."—"For that very reason," replied Henry, "and for that only, because it was in the face of the whole village, I did a violence to myself, rather than expose you to their malice. Think not I can be so ungrateful as to slight your kindness; but when you consider the disgraceful situation, in which you found me, and from which you reliev'd me, you cannot wonder if I was cautious of letting you appear any otherwise interested than in common charity for so mean an object. Recollect, Susan, your advantages over these people in point of person and appearance, and then judge what their envy and ill-nature wou'd have prompted them to say, had I not had the resolution to withstand your flattering advances, and put a force upon myself, by treating you with a cold and distant regard."


"That is very easy to do," replied Susan,

"when the regard is really cold and distant;—but suppose that I were not indifferent to you; grant for a moment that you was as kind-hearted towards me, as I am disposed to be to you, cou'd you have done as you did?—nay, put the case that you lik'd me only half as well as I like you, Henry, then let me ask you, if you wou'd, if you cou'd, have slighted my advances, though every soul in the village had been present at our meeting?"

Susan, now covered with blushes, hung her head, whilst Henry was little less embarrassed than herself. After a short silence, recollecting himself, and stepping back a few paces, with a serious tone and countenance, he spoke as follows:—"I perceive, Susan, that you and I had better shorten this conversation, and part, without explaining more of our sentiments for each other, than is consistent with discretion, and a prudent regard to our respective situations. You, thank Heaven! are not the destitute unfriended creature that I am; the child of mystery and misfortune; the very outcast, as it should seem, of creation. Though you have quitted a profitable establishment upon principle, you are known in the neighbourhood, and your character will recommend you

to no worse a service than you have left: I am a stranger, and must wander over the earth, wherever these feet, which you have delivered from the stocks, can carry me, in search of a precarious maintenance, unless some friendly serjeant will equip me with a musket."—Susan started at the word.—Henry proceeded—"Nay, my dear girl, don't be surpris'd, that I prefer the humblest station in his majesty's service to that of being the despicable favourite of our abandon'd mistress. Where can I now resort for another service? Can I step out of the stocks into a gentleman's family? Who will receive a nameless vagrant with a suspected character? I conjure you, therefore, not to waste a thought upon me: for such misfortunes as affect myself alone, I am prepar'd; but were I to involve a friend in the same troubles with myself, it would be such a state of misery as I could not stand under."

This was too much for the soft heart of Susan to support: hurried away by the impulse of her affections, and melted by the looks and language of Henry, she fell upon his neck, and burst into an agony of tears: agitated at once by the passions of love and pity, and never practised to disguise her feelings,

she gave a loose to her fond affliction, generously declaring that she was ready to meet any difficulties or distresses for his sake; and that, having now quitted her service, she had the world before her, and was as much to seek for a settlement as himself. She next produced her stock of money, which amounted to little less than twenty pounds, and tendering it to him, said, "Look, Henry, here is our joint stock; take it, and dispose of it as our occasions may require; here is enough, you see, to keep off want for a while, 'till we can settle ourselves to our content in some decent family, where we may both find places, and by our joint earnings support ourselves comfortably, and be happy in each other. Oh! my dear Henry, let us never part."

As she spoke these words, she pressed him in her arms. Henry, no less sensibly affected by the generosity of the speech, than by the tender action which accompanied it, had no small struggle within himself, before he found power and resolution to answer as follows:—"Let us recollect ourselves, my dear Susan, and before we yield to passion, hear what reason and discretion say. Your purse, in the first place, I will not touch: the earnings of

your industry shall not be applied to my necessities, whilst I have limbs to labour; no distress, that I can singly suffer, wou'd be half so insupportable to me, as the remorse of making you a sacrifice to my misfortunes: let not, therefore, your tender heart be wounded; think me not insensible either to your kindness or your charms, when I declare to you, that in my present circumstances, no power on earth, not even these endearments, so delightful to me and so flattering as they are, can prevail over my self-denial, or betray me into a dishonest gratification of my own interest at the expence of your's; neither will I yield to desires, however urgent, or opportunities, however tempting, to abuse your confidence and ensnare your virtue. No, my dear girl, this proof of love you have given me, this fair confession, and these affectionate caresses, are pledges for the security of my honour and your innocence, which I will never violate; but though I am certain nothing can debase me to such villainy as I shou'd be guilty of, were I to act contrary to this resolution, yet, as it is a principle that requires no small share of self-command to adhere to, tempt me not any further, I implore

you, but generously assist me to conquer my sensibility, by restraining your own."


"Then I am indeed a wretched and forsaken creature," cried Susan, "and life is no longer worth preserving: oh Henry, you have destroy'd me!"—"Heaven forbid!" exclaimed the affrighted youth, "what wou'd you have me do or say to put your heart at rest?"—"Love me as I love you," she replied, "and let us never part; for if you forsake me, I think I cannot survive your cruelty."—"Call me not cruel," he rejoined, "because I am not base enough to avail myself of your generosity, by involving you in circumstances that you cannot fail to regret, when you shall be more capable of reflection than you are at present. Can I give a stronger proof of my esteem, than by taking more care of you than you are disposed to take of yourself? What but misery can ensue from your attachment to a wretched thing like me? Believe me, Susan, there are insuperable objections to our lawful alliance; I cannot marry, and I will not betray you."—Here Susan fetched a deep sigh, and looked earnestly in his face.—"Do not urge me for my reasons," he added, "I must not reveal them; and let it

satisfy you, that they are not to be surmounted: it shou'd seem to me that I am doom'd to be a solitary wanderer in darkness and obscurity that I cannot penetrate. You started at my saying I wou'd take a musket; what else can I do? Hitherto I have been in two services only, and in both unfortunate. Whither am I next to go? My education has not train'd me to any art or handicraft: I have strength indeed for daily labour, but I am a stranger to the practice of it: I can neither weild a flail, nor hold the plough. I have pass'd my days in such tranquillity and retirement from the world, that every scene of active life, much more every trial of adversity, is new to me, and strange. I was never taught to be a servant, and those things which coarser natures are enur'd to bear, my spirit indignantly revolts from. A man should be made flexible by education before he can submit to be the slave of such a mistress as our doctor's wife. I wou'd starve rather than stoop to her unwarrantable humours; neither cou'd I endure to truckle to such a wretch as Blachford, tho' my life was in his hands. One friend only I have chanc'd upon in my misfortunes, and that friend, by nature the most generous and

affectionate, is by her sex, her youth, her beauty and condition, more expos'd to danger, and more in need of protection, than even I myself am. How then ought I to conduct myself towards that tender and too generous friend? ought I to strip her of the little means she has put together as a security against distress? ought I, like a traitor, to steal into her honest unsuspecting heart, and rob it of its innocence and peace? shou'd I take that hand, which I cannot honourably join to mine, and lead her by it into misery and ruin? may Heaven renounce me if I do!"

The look, the action and energy of voice, with which these concluding words were accompanied, awed the fond afflicted damsel into silence and submission; she drooped her head and wept: the piteous manner of it was more than eloquence; even the firm heart of virtue yielded to a momentary weakness, which nature seized the instant to indulge; he cast a look of tenderness upon her, sighed, and threw his arms about her neck. In the same moment, a shout, or rather yell, of drunken villagers assailed his ears; he sprung with horror and alarm from her embrace, looked eagerly around him, and soon, with infinite regret, perceived

that he had been discovered by a party of fellows from an adjoining field, who had set up a cry, or kind of view-holla in token of what they had seen. This unmanly triumph stung him to the quick, and the more so as he perceived it was the party of his antagonist the miller, whose person he distinguished amongst them. His apprehension for Susan's reputation, thus exposed to their malignant raillery, was his chief concern; but on this score she endeavoured to relieve his anxiety, by repeatedly assuring him, that she held their malice in perfect contempt, being determined also upon quitting the village immediately, and seeking a service elsewhere: she told him it was her purpose to walk to the market-town, where he had first met Zachary, and where she had an uncle, who followed the trade of a barber, and was well known, and in good esteem in the place: she pressed him so earnestly to meet her there, that he could not get released from her solicitations, till he had made her that promise, which, having done, and given his hand in pledge and assurance of his faithful performance of it, he was unwillingly let to depart, and immediately set forward towards the party, who had annoyed him by their shouts,

and by whom, in delicacy to Susan, he wished to be once more seen, as having quitted her company.


CHAPTER VI. He that won't take Caution, must take Consequences.
WHILST Henry was following a foot-path across the enclosures that led him the way which the miller and his comrades had taken, he saw a man at some distance, whom he perceived to be his friend Bowsey, loitering about the side of a coppice; the sight of him in such a place, and certain symptoms that betrayed no good design, brought to Henry's recollection the menaces he had reproved him for venting against Weevil, when they were fellow-prisoners in the stocks. He kept his eye upon him till he saw him creep into the wood, and he then bethought himself that it might not be an unnecessary precaution to furnish himself with some weapon of defence, in case he should fall in either with Bowsey

or the hostile party, for his suspicions of his former friend were now become not less unfavourable than what he entertained of his avowed enemies. With this intent he had singled a stout stem of a crab-tree in the hedge; but upon applying to his pocket for his knife to cut it off, he recollected with much regret that he had entrusted it to Bowsey's keeping, and had forgotten to demand it of him after the fight was over. This knife had been the gift of a friend; a plate of silver was inlaid upon the heft, and the word Henry at full length engraved upon it. It was furnished with a long and pointed blade, and was as formidable a weapon in the hand of a villain as a villain could desire. He had every reason to wish it back again in his own possession, and therefore took the straitest course towards the gap in the coppice, where he had observed Bowsey to enter.
In the way thither, and when he had approached near the place, where a narrow path led to a stile at the entrance of the coppice, he chanced upon young Weevil, the miller, who had parted from his comrades and was on his way to the mill, which laid not many furlongs on the other side of the coppice in question.

Henry, observing that his head was bound about with a handkerchief, very civilly enquired after his hurt, expressing his regret for the severe blow he had dealt him, protesting that he had not struck in malice or with an intent to maim him. A short and surly answer was all that Henry gained by this friendly address; yet he proceeded to caution Weevil against Bowsey, and to give him some intimations of what had escaped from that revengeful fellow, whilst he was sitting by him in the stocks: he told him that he verily believed he harboured mischief in his heart against him, that he had seen him prowling about the skirts of the wood, that he had entered it a few minutes before over the stile which Weevil had to pass; and as he knew him to be armed with a dangerous weapon, he recommended to him either to go home by another way, or to accept of him as a companion through the coppice.

"Accept of you!" cried the miller, "no, truly I want no such scurvy companion to go with me: keep your distance, and let me have none of your cant, for I don't believe there is the value of a rope's end to choose

between your friend and you; therefore march off, if you please, take your own course, and leave me to follow mine: one at a time, and I fear neither of you; but before I pass this stile, let me see you out of reach, and I'll stand to consequences for what may follow."—"Go your way, then," replied Henry, "for I see you are incorrigible; only remember I have given you warning, and am clear in conscience." This said, he turned aside, and was out of sight in a minute.
Weevil paused a while, then, grasping his cudgel, nimbly vaulted over the stile and entered the coppice. A narrow winding path led through the underwood, which was thick and over-grown, so as to make his passage somewhat difficult; when, as he was putting aside the hazel-boughs with his hand, a violent stroke on the head brought him instantly to the ground: it was from the hand of the villain Bowsey, who in the same moment springing upon him, and making a thrust at him with his knife, began to rifle him of the canvas bag, which he had so idly displayed in the ale-house, and which was probably the chief incentive to the murderous assault, though it must

be owned the rancour of the wretch's heart was black enough, without a provocative, to undertake any infamous act of malice and revenge.
Henry, in the mean time, whom the sullenness of Weevil's manners could not divest of anxiety for his life, heard the stroke as he was still hovering near the spot, for his mind augured mischief. Without a moment's hesitation he rushed into the coppice, and forcing his way through it with a rapidity no obstacles could impede, unarmed as he was, leapt suddenly upon the assassin, seizing him by the throat with one hand, whilst with the other he wrenched the bloody knife out of his grasp, which, together with the canvas bag, and the money it contained, fell upon the ground. Apprehensive that the robber might recover the knife, he took occasion in the struggle to possess himself of it again; but whilst he was stooping for this purpose, one hand only being employed in holding Bowsey, the sturdy villain seized the moment for escape, and with a sudden jerk extricated himself from his hold, and fled for life. The exertion Bowsey had made in getting loose was so violent as to cause Henry to step back some paces, who, in his struggle to keep his legs, received so

severe a sprain in his ancle, that he became incapable of pursuing him. Sick and pale as ashes with the acuteness of the pain, he stood still to recover himself; a faint cold sweat burst out all over him; at his feet lay the body of Weevil, apparently without life, and bleeding from the side, where the stab had been given him; in the hand of Henry was the bloody knife, and upon the ground the canvas bag; the pockets of the plundered man were rifled, and turned inside out.
In this suspicious posture, and at this very moment, almost fainting with what he suffered, and horror-struck with what he looked upon, our ill-starr'd hero found himself on the sudden violently seized by the whole party whom he had first descried in Weevil's company, and who now, with one voice, pronounced him guilty of the horrid act. The vehemence with which they sprung upon him brought him to the ground, and in his fall gave him such intolerable anguish, that had they been disposed to listen to his defence, which they were not, he was in no capacity of making it. At length, however, he summoned strength and resolution enough to tell them in few words that his hurt was got in the defence,

and not in the assault of the wounded man; that Bowsey was the assassin, and, pointing to the way by which he had run off, earnestly recommended them to set out in pursuit of him.—"You are in the right of that," quoth one of them, "for then you will be off, and so we shall lose you both; as for your sprain'd ancle, I take it to be a mere sham, so get up, and come along with us to the Justice's." This said, they raised him on his feet; and now it must be confest the figure he exhibited, sprinkled with the blood of the wounded man, the fatal knife in his hand, and his looks ghastly and full of horror, was such as might fairly have staggered minds more equitably disposed than their's. They had seen him fighting with Weevil, and it was on all hands concluded that malice and revenge had spurred him on, jointly with Bowsey, to perpetrate the bloody deed. Nobody, however, thought of stirring a step in pursuit of Bowsey; contented with their capture, they held him fast, whilst one ran to the mill with the dismal tidings, and all seemed to forget that any attention was to be given to poor Weevil, who to all appearance seemed to be in a state that needed little other service than that of burial.

The main object with the whole posse, appeared to be that only of guarding one disabled man, incapable of escape, which they now manfully set about with no small noise and clamour, hauling him along, though in racking pain, without stop or stay, to the house of the worshipful Justice Blachford, of whom in this place we shall take occasion, with the reader's leave, to premise a few particulars, introductory of a character, who has no slight part to sustain in this important history.


CHAPTER VII. A Man may be led to act mercifully upon evil Motives.
ROBERT Blachford, Esquire, who has already been slightly introduced to our readers, was proprietor of a small estate in the village where he resided, which he had lately purchased of the distressed survivor of a family, very antient in the county, and once very respectable. He was rich in money, close in his oeconomy, and unencumbered with wife or relations: in his genealogy he was not to be traced any otherwise than by conjecture,

it being natural to suppose that he had a father, grandfather, and so upwards, through as many generations as his neighbours, who had kept a better account of them: All that the world in general knew of him was, that he had made a fortune in the island of Jamaica from a very abject station in society, and that his familiars in that quarter of the globe pretty generally complimented him with the stile and title of Bloody Bob Blachford.

He was now perhaps fifty years of age or more, of a stout athletic make, with a swarthy atrabilious complexion, strongly leaning towards the cast of the mulatto, with all his passions hot and fiery as indulgence could make them, cunning and self-interested, fawning to his superiors, arbitrary over those he could oppress, unforgiving and unfeeling. As neither his manners nor morals spoke much in his favour, he had been little noticed by any of the neighbouring gentry, till in a recent contest for the county he became so active an agent for the candidate he espous'd, and thereby recommended himself so effectually to the leading friends of the party, that he obtained the honour of having the name of Robert Blachford, Esquire, inserted in the commission

of the peace, and with very little legal qualification for the office, but great zeal t
•
 make himself a man of consequence in the country, he had taken out his dedimus.

Before we present our hero at the tribunal of this worshipful distributor of justice, amongst whose failings certainly weak pity had no place, it may be necessary to account for a seeming contradiction to this remark, exemplified in his late treatment of our aforesaid hero, who had escaped out of his hands with a much slighter chastisement, than could be expected from so rigorous a magistrate: but though mercy was not predominant in the heart of Blachford, there was a certain passion in that region, which we cannot dignify by the name of love, and will not stain our page by affixing to it the real title which it merits. Now this passion had a great deal to say in the cabinet councils of Blachford's bosom; it could very easily make him resort to every species of treachery to compass it's indulgence; it could even untie his purse-strings in some cases, where nothing else would ferve the turn, and now and then (as in the instance alluded to) has been known to put a violence on his nature, by forcing him into

measures that had an outward resemblance to charity and forgiveness.
Susan May, as we have before hinted, was eminently endowed with those powers and capacities, that are requisite to put the aforesaid nameless passion of Blachford's into a state of high activity and effervescence; she had also, as our readers must have discovered, a large portion of benevolence, and though this was a pleader, singly considered, that he would have turned a deaf ear to from the bench, yet when seconded by beauty like her's, it could convert a desperate cause into a good one. Blachford had seen Henry, as our history has related, and neither from the survey of his person, nor from the circumstances of the interview, had he received any such impressions as were likely to favour a suit undertaken in his behalf; when Susan, therefore, betrayed such anxiety and solicitude for his sake, and earnestly demanded a release from the ignominious confinement he was in, the Justice held the balance between two opposing passions with so even a hand, that it was for a long while doubtful whether her charms or his jealousy would turn the scale. Nothing could so gall his pride, as her zealous importunity

for a rival whom he dreaded and abhorred, but the terror she was in for his safety added such expression to her features, that though they hurt her argument they advanced her suit. Blachford painted the case in such aggravated colours, as alarmed her to the height; and as he took care to insinuate that no hand but his could snatch her favourite object from his danger, the insidious villain secured to himself an interest from her fears, that his whole fortune perhaps could not have purchased from her favours. The bribe of rescuing her beloved Henry, was the only bribe she could not resolutely withstand. Blachford stated that the life of Weevil was in danger, that it was his duty as a magistrate to keep the assailant in safe hold, and he must absolutely commit him to prison, there to abide the issue; that to gratify her partiality for a worthless fellow, by letting him loose upon society, would be a stretch of power on his part, that would put his reputation to risque, and perhaps be attended with very serious consequences; nevertheless, he was ready to run all hazards for her sake, could he but find her disposed to make any return on her part for such services. To this she

replied, that all the return in her power to make was gratitude; and of this he might be assured, she would never fail to bear his favour in remembrance.
Gratitude, he observed to her, was so mere a burden to a generous mind, that she would do well to avail herself of the power she had to balance the account at once by favours, which he had long solicited in vain, though he had strove to merit them by constant attention to her, and frequent gratuities to her indigent mother. To this she replied, with proper spirit, that she was persuaded, if her mother, poor as she was, could suspect his kindness to her was only a cover for designs upon her daughter, she would spurn such favours, and despise him for his baseness; adding, that she was no less sure, that such wou'd be the sentiments of the unhappy youth now in his power, did he suspect that his safety was to be purchased by the sacrifice of her person.

"Then keep your person," cried Blachford sullenly, "and let him keep his prison: let him rot, starve, and perish in his straw!"—"Oh horrible!" she exclaimed, "what terrors do you give me! must he suffer this,

when I can redeem him? What is it I must do? what are the torments I must suffer to save him?"—"Don't talk of torments," replied the filthy satyr, forcing his savage visage into a smile, when every thing that money can purchase shall be yours; all the fine things that my purse can procure to set you off; you shall be no longer a servant, but live at your ease and be the envy of every body, so kind will I be to you, and so handsome the style in which I will maintain you."

Here he began to make certain familiar overtures, which she put aside, saying in a peremptory tone, "Set your prisoner free in the first place; give immediate orders for his release, and let me see him safe and at liberty; 'tis the only favour you can grant me."—With this she turned from him as if to leave the room, when Blachford nimbly interposed, and bolting the door, caught her with a ferocious kind of extacy in his arms; the manner of it more resembled the assault of a ruffian than the caresses of a lover; his age, his person, his black and merciless visage were calculated to inspire terror and disgust: such was the effect they had upon the present object of his desires, who instantly set up a scream so loud and shrill, that it echoed

through the house. Had the scene of this rencontre been a solitude, Blachford's courage would most probably have been proof against the outcry; but situated as he now was, in the midst of habitations, with the cottage of Susan's mother near adjoining, the alarm became serious, and to persist was to expose himself to public disgrace. Frighted for his reputation, though in principle unreformed, he instantly let loose his victim, and fell to entreaties and apologies, begging her to be silent, and promising to comply with her request on the spot, if she would only assure him of keeping secret what had passed. There was enough in Susan's keeping, of which the reader shall hereafter be informed, besides this affair, to have put his reputation, if not his life, at her mercy; we need not wonder therefore if he was glad to seal a peace, and send the constable to release his prisoner in the manner already related.



CHAPTER VIII. Innocence may, by Circumstances, assume the Appearance of Guilt.
TO the worshipful personage, whom we have been describing, our hero was now carried, and arraigned by the joint evidence of all who had been present at his seizure. The knife was produced, which, upon interrogation, he acknowledged to be his property, stamped with his name. The canvas purse was exhibited, which the witnesses testified to have been taken by Weevil out of his pocket in the ale-house kitchen in presence of the prisoner, and its contents displayed upon the table. The quarrel he had had with the wounded man was notorious to the whole village, and the language Bowsey had addressed to him upon their being freed from the stocks, was perfectly well remembered: the very attitude, in which he was discovered, standing over the body, sprinkled with blood, pale and ghastly, and confused, with every other circumstance that could corroborate suspicion, were stated and described. It was not denied but that

Bowsey's disappearance made it highly probable he was an accomplice in the act, which was the rather credited from the conversation above alluded to; and orders were in consequence given for a pursuit, which however were better heard than obeyed, several persons undertaking it, but none setting out upon the errand.
Hitherto the prisoner had not opposed a word to the ceaseless torrent of accusation, that had been poured upon him. The clerk had been busied in minuting down the depositions, and the Justice was preparing to make out his commitment; when, taking up the knife, and shewing it to the prisoner, he said, "You acknowledge this knife to be your property?"—"I do," replied Henry—"And with this knife the stab was given to the unhappy man, whose life has probably been sacrificed thereby—With that very knife the deed was done, but not by my hand."—"I understand you," said the Justice, "but for that we shall not take your word; he that does not scruple to commit a murder, will not hesitate to advance a falsehood in his defence."—"True," replied Henry; "but if the wounded man is alive and in his senses, I refer myself to him;

let him be my witness, I have none other, except my conscience and my God."—"Mighty well, cried the Justice; "that we shall enquire into hereafter."—Here several voices cried out that the man was dead, others said he was insensible, but nobody was dispatched to make enquiry.—"Your christian name, I perceive," quoth the Justice, "is engraved upon the knife-handle; and what other name do you answer to?"—"I beg leave to decline answering that question," replied the prisoner. "How!" exclaimed Blachford with a voice of authority, "not tell your name, fellow! I wou'd have you to know the law will force you to declare it; the thumb-screw will wring it from you. Hark'ye, clerk, turn to the book, and tell this contumacious fellow what the statute enacts in the case of not declaring his name." The clerk now whispered his worship, and probably informed him that there was no provision to enforce an absolute declaration of his name. The Justice next demanded the condition of his parents, where he was born, and to what place he belonged?—"Those questions," answered he, "I must in like manner decline, for no torture can force me to disclose what I do not know."—"Heyday!" cried the Justice, "you

do not know who were your parents, nor where you was born, nor what place you belong to?"—"I told your worship," said one who was the chief spokesman of the party who apprehended him, "that he was a vagabond and a no-nation rascal, when I informed against him for his assault upon poor Tom Weevil on the Town-Green; he wou'd then have murder'd him, had not your worship stept in as you did: I wish to Heaven, when you had him in the stocks, you had kept him there, and not have let that wench Sukey May, who is no better than she shou'd be, have prevailed upon you to release him."

The magistrate reddened at this retort, and was evidently disconcerted. Henry took the opportunity to say, "that he desir'd that young woman, whom the witness was pleas'd to describe as no better than she shou'd be, might be summon'd, as he believ'd she wou'd have something to depose in his exculpation, which might tend to solve the appearances that were against him, and corroborate the defence he was prepar'd to make."


"Aye, aye!" rejoined the aforesaid spokesman, "there is no doubt but that hussey will speak to your character, if she is call'd upon;

for, please your worship, I myself, and these men with me, saw that very wench and this fellow in close quarters together under a hedge, hugging and kissing after a fine fashion; so that there is no question but what one says, t'other will swear to; besides," added he, "Sukey May has run away from her service and fled the parish, which, I believe, you will find to be the case, if your worship thinks fit to enquire of her late mistress, Madam Cawdle."

The Justice did not wish to make any enquiries of or about Susan May, who probably was the very last person living he at this moment wished to see, or even to be named in his hearing; he therefore briefly observed to the spokesman, that what he had been saying was irrelevant; and turning to the prisoner, demanded if he could call any other witness in his defence. "If Thomas Weevil be yet living," said Henry, "I appeal to him; his testimony alone can clear the fact; if he is no more, or incapable of giving evidence, and if Bowsey, the sole perpetrator of the deed, has escaped, I must rest my defence upon my own single account of the transaction, corroborated, however, by the evidence that Susan May can give of certain circumstances antecedent to it."—

"We have heard enough of those certain circumstances," quoth the Justice—whereupon, rising from his chair with much solemnity, and fixing a stern look upon the prisoner, he demanded of him what else he had to offer, before he proceeded to fulfil the duties of his office, by committing him to prison. "I again desire," replied Henry, "that resort may be immediately had to the wounded man; providentially it may so happen, that neither the blow he received on the head by the bludgeon of the robber, nor the stab in his side, are mortal, or, if mortal, not so immediate as to disqualify him from performing one act of justice before he leaves the world, that of saving the reputation, and perhaps the life, of an innocent man, who has fallen into this peril by standing forth in his rescue and defence. If I am to be deprived of this appeal, which I hold to be my right, I am still prepared to account for every circumstance that appears to make against me; and if that fails me, ultimately I am provided against the worst that can befall me, for God and my own conscience will acquit me; they are my witnesses, and will testify that I am guiltless."


"How dare you, impious wretch as you are," cried the Justice, "to use the name of

God in my hearing, before whom you stand accused of murder, and apprehended in the very act, as I may say, by these men, who are credible witnesses and depose against you? And you truly to talk of conscience! who, if you had such a thing belonging to you, or any remorse at heart for the heinous crime you have committed, wou'd ere now have made confession of your guilt, and invok'd the punishment it merits, seeing you have no one word to offer in your defence, nor any creature to appeal to but a wretch, who is your accomplice, and an unhappy girl, whom there is too much reason to fear you have ruin'd and seduc'd, which, though it falls not within the present charge against you, is a crime that cannot be spoken of without horror. And now, having examin'd you touching the felony in question, and taken in writing the information of those who apprehended you, I shall proceed to commit you to prison for safe custody, the offence of which you are charg'd being of a capital nature, and in which bail is ousted by statute: your sureties, therefore, must be the four walls of the prison and none else: there you must lie till the next county assizes, when you shall be arraign'd before the court upon

the inquisition of the coroner. It now remains that I say something to you upon the strong evidence of the circumstances, in which you was apprehended, and of the heinous nature of the act, of which you stand charg'd; and this I shall do the rather, because there seems a harden'd insensibility and impenitence about you, which are shocking to all here present. The crime of deliberate and wilful murder, whereof you are accus'd, is a crime, from which the heart of man starts with horror, and revolts, and which throughout the world is punished with death. The unhappy object, whom you have sent unprepar'd to his account, was found by these people present, mortally stabb'd to the heart; the fatal weapon, bathed in his blood, was in your hand; a knife of a dangerous and unlawful construction, which you admit to be your property, and bearing your christian name upon the handle, though of any other name that belongs to you, you contumaciously refuse to make discovery, a circumstance, let me observe to you, of a very suspicious aspect. The pockets of the deceased had been rifled, and his purse, containing money to no small amount, was found, not indeed in your hands, but within your reach and under your eye; certain

it is, it had been ravish'd from him by violence, and the presumption is, that it was your purpose to rob as well as murder, but that being surpriz'd unawares, you had not yet actually possess'd yourself of the spoils which had tempted you to that horrid act. It has been objected to me by one now present, that I was too lenient in releasing you so easily from the temporary confinement I inflicted upon you, when you broke the peace by an unprovok'd and violent assault upon the unhappy party, now no more: to this I reply, that I rather wish I had abstain'd from punishing at all in the first instance, apprehending, as I do, that your vindictive and cruel rage against the aforesaid party was probably inflam'd and aggravated to the height of murder by that very punishment you had on his account incurr'd, slight as it was. You have, or affect to have, receiv'd an injury by a strain; if so, I must observe that it is but one amongst a cloud of circumstances, that bear against you; for what so natural as that a strong and vigorous youth, like Thomas Weevil, should make a struggle for his life, and that you in the assault should not escape unhurt, though fatally too successful in the perpetration

of your inhuman purposes? The youth, who fell under your deadly stroke, liv'd amongst us, his neighbours, in good repute, an honest, unoffending, peaceable lad, the son of an industrious father, whose tears are now watering his breathless corpse, and whose cries are sent up to the throne of justice against you his murderer."

Whilst the Justice was uttering these words, the countenance of Henry turned deadly pale, and giving a sigh, he cast up his eyes and fell backwards in a swoon. Though he was surrounded by the men who had apprehended him, there was not one who moved a hand to save him, so that he came with his whole weight upon the floor, where he laid, stretcht at his length, insensible, and to appearance dead. The Justice started from his seat, and exclaimed, "Behold, conviction upon the face of it! My words have reach'd his heart! conscience has smitten him at last, obdurate as he was!"

The triumph of eloquence was painted in his countenance, and he looked around him, as if to demand the tribute of applause from all who had heard him.



CHAPTER IX. Audi alteram Partem.
THE guiltless prisoner, who had fainted with the agony of his sprain, encreased by standing so long in presence of the Justice, soon recovered, and with the assistance of the by-standers was raised from the floor; he was now indulged with a seat, being unable to keep his legs, and in this posture requested leave to say a few words for himself before he was dismissed to prison.
He began by accounting for his swoon from the natural cause, asserting that it was in his struggle with the assassin, whom he knew only by the name of Bowsey, that he got his hurt; that it was then he wrenched from him the bloody knife found in his hand, which he acknowledged to be his own, explaining how it came to be in Bowsey's possession, when he emptied his pockets before he set to with Weevil on the green: to this fact he feared he had no witness, as no one else would assist or come near him on that occasion. "Hard indeed is my case," said he, "in this particular, who

have none to bear evidence to so material a circumstance but a guilty wretch, who is fled from justice, and whom this hurt which I received disabled me from pursuing."

Here Blachford appealed to the by-standers, if there was any one present who could bear witness to the prisoner's delivery of the knife to Bowsey. The answer was loud and general in the negative. "Then let us have no more arguing on that point," added he, "we shall not take the fact on your single assertion."—"I have done," replied the prisoner; "God knows I speak the truth."

There was a person amongst the crowd, who had been a silent observer of all that passed, and now stept forward with much gravity, crying out in an authoritative tone, "I conjure you, Worshipful Sir, for the love of God, and by your duty as a magistrate, sitting here to administer impartial justice to the accused no less than to the accusers, that you suffer the prisoner to proceed in his defence, nay, verily, that you encourage and provoke him thereunto."

This person, by name Ezekiel Daw, was one of those itinerant apostles called Methodists, who preach sub dio to the country

folks out of trees, and being a man strong in zeal and loud of lungs, was followed with great avidity: his appeal was not unattended to, and the prisoner was ordered to proceed in his defence.

"I must ever lament," resumed Henry, "my neglect in forgetting to demand of Bowsey the fatal instrument I had entrusted to his keeping; but when these facts shall be investigated at a superior tribunal, and I am brought to the bar to plead for my life, I shall call upon these men who now depose against me, to declare upon their oaths, whether they discover'd any other weapon in my hand, save only the knife I had recover'd from the assassin."

The Justice here put the question to the parties, who jointly answered, that they did not observe any other weapon which the prisoner had. "And what need is there of any other," replied the Justice, "seeing that the mortal stab was given with this very knife."—"Let the body be inspected," said the prisoner, "and you shall find a violent contusion on the head by the blow of a bludgeon; this was the first stroke which the unhappy man receiv'd, and this, it is to be presum'd, brought

him to the ground."—"How do you know that," cried the Justice, "unless you was present, and of consequence accessary to the fact? Beware how you criminate yourself. Besides, did not you fight with Thomas Weevil? did you not knock him down repeatedly? and was not his head bound up with a handkerchief in consequence of the bruises he receiv'd from your blows? What will any court of enquiry infer from contusions on his head, but that he was indebted for them to you? Once more I tell you to beware how you criminate yourself: Nemo tenebatur prodere seipsum."


"If when I speak the truth," resum'd Henry, "the truth is either so distorted by quibble, or so colour'd by circumstance to the complexion of guilt, as to be turn'd against me, I am indeed unfortunate, but not afraid to meet the consequences, whilst my heart acquits me. Recollect, Sir, that you have call'd upon me to plead; ought you not then to hear my plea with the patience of a judge, and not to traverse it with the sophistry of an advocate, who is feed for puzzling and brow-beating the party he is oppos'd to? A bloody and felonious act is committed; I am brought before

you as the perpetrator of it; a villain, whom I seiz'd in the commission of it, but who escap'd me and is fled, was known to bear enmity against the suffering party, as some here present, if they please, can testify; I saw that villain lurking about the spot where the mischief happen'd, and had my apprehensions of his evil designs against the person in question; I met that unfortunate person before he enter'd the fatal place; I made known to him my apprehensions, warn'd him of his danger, and advis'd him either to take some other road homewards, or to accept of me as a companion and a guard: he treated my friendly warning with contempt, and absolutely forbade me to accompany him: I retir'd, but not to a distance, for my fears augur'd mischief: I heard the blow which fell'd him to the ground, and without a moment's delay ran to his relief; I found him prostrate, stabb'd, and weltering in his blood; I seiz'd the murderous villain by the throat; he had that very knife and the canvass purse in his hands; they dropt to the ground; I stoop'd to secure the knife in my own defence; in that moment, by a sudden jerk, he extricated himself from my hold, and in the struggle I receiv'd this sprain, which

disabled me from pursuing him. This is the simple detail of facts, which, unfortunately for me, are so combined as to leave me without a witness to the truth of what I assert, unless the wounded man survives to recollect what has pass'd: I hear it asserted by some present that he is dead; I hope that is not the case, and that you will think it right to be certified of the fact before you commit me to prison; I have also heard very unjust insinuations against the young woman, whom I am accus'd of treating with indecent familiarities, Susannah May: I take Heaven to witness that no familiarities, which ought to affect her reputation, have ever pass'd between her and me: they did indeed see me salute her affectionately at parting, for I hold myself much indebted to her humanity; and if upon that innocent liberty they are malicious enough to found an aspersion on her good fame, I do not envy them their triumph."

He now made an obeisance to the Justice, and ceased from speaking.



CHAPTER X. Solvuntur Tabulae.
AS soon as the prisoner had concluded his defence, the Justice and his clerk retired into another room to consult together upon his commitment. The impression which the foregoing defence made upon the hearers was not in all cases unfavourable to the pleader; some were inclined to believe him innocent, many were staggered by his relation, and not a few of the softer sex were melted into tears by his language and address, though they knew not how to decide upon his argument.
Ezekiel Daw betrayed great agitation, deeply groaning in the spirit, yet refrained from words. In the interim, a poor widow, the mother of Susan May, who picked up a scanty livelihood by compounding a few simple medicines for the poor villagers, had stept home, and now returned with some stuff in a bottle, which she gave to Henry for his sprain, saying, as she presented it to him, "God knows the truth; thou may'st or thou may'st not be

guilty, yet I give it thee in charity, for truly thy hurt is great, and thou art in grievous torture."

This unexpected instance, that there was one humane breast to be found, which harboured pity for his hapless condition, struck him with such tender yet joyful surprize, that with a heart too full for utterance, and eyes overflowing with tears, he took the gift in silence, fixing a look upon the donor, which spake all that tongue-tied gratitude could convey.
The poor widow, whom awe and respect had kept silent before the Justice, now addressed herself to the person who had spoke so slightingly of her daughter, and demanded if it was not a base and cruel thing to blast the character of a poor girl as he had done, in the hearing of all her neighbours. "As for this stranger lad," added she, "I know him not, God only knows what he may be in heart; but though he were all or more than you describe him to be, he has done justice to my child, and I thank him for it: if he has murder'd a man, to be sure it is a heinous and a horrid crime, but it is no less a base and cowardly action in you to slander an innocent

poor girl, who has neither father nor brother to stand up for her."

Before the defamer could collect his thoughts for a reply to this appeal, Ezekiel Daw, the preacher, had once more put himself forward in an attitude to speak, and all eyes being upon him, expectation held the assembly mute, when he delivered himself as follows:

"Verily, brethren, the charity of this poor widow to an afflicted stranger, and the word which she hath utter'd in reproof of slander, have been a comfort unto my heart, and a refreshment, as it were, of my bowels in the Lord: and thou, John Jenkins, who art hereby rebuked for an evil tongue, humble thyself, I exhort thee, John Jenkins, before this the mother of the damsel, whom thou hast made evil report of, and be humbled in thy pride of speech, keeping a better watch in time to come upon the door of thy lips. Slander, my good neighbours, is a wicked thing; beware of slander, for it is filthy, it is abominable; it biteth sharper than the tooth of the cockatrice; it is more deadly than the tongue of the asp: away with it therefore, away with it from amongst you! O John, John, knowest

thou not the calling whereunto thou art called in this place of trial, where thou art summoned in the sight of God to render up the truth in fair and honest testimony, be it unto the life, or be it unto the death of this thy fellow creature arraigned before the magistrate? What had'st thou to do, John Jenkins, to impeach the testimony of that poor damsel, to whom the prisoner was disposed to appeal, because thou didst surprise her in the tender moment of parting from this her fellow-servant, concede unto him the kiss of peace? or what if I should grant it were the kiss of love? Behold, the youth is of a comely visage, and saving this suspicion under which he sorroweth, verily I pronounce him to be of an ingenuous aspect; so art not thou, John Jenkins, for the countenance of the slanderer is not open and erect; he casteth his eyes down to the ground; he lurketh about in secret places, seeking whom he may devour, and of a truth he doth devour them, when he getteth them privily into his net. Brethren, I would fain speak more copiously to you on the heinousness of slander, but neither the time nor place will admit of it; but, on the Lord's day next, God willing, I purpose more at large to descant

upon the topic: in the mean time, let the example of this poor widow be unto you a lesson of charity and good works; for she scrupled not to pour oil upon the wounds of the way-faring man and stranger, not examining whether he had fallen amongst thieves, or was himself the thief, but doing it in the very bowels of mercy and christian commiseration, kindly compassionating his anguish, as one fellow creature to another not pronouncing upon his guilt, as you seem forward to do, but leaving it to God and his country to acquit him, or condemn.—And now, I warn thee, John Jenkins, against a certain thing to which thou art no less addicted than to back-biting; I mean mockery, and an idle faculty of turning serious things, and even sacred, into ridicule, gibing and jeering at thy more pious brethren, who are patient of thy taunts; and why? verily, because they despise thee, and hold thee as a very silly fellow: make not thine idle companions merry at my cost; scoff not at me, John Jenkins, nor put thy sensual fancies to my account, as if I had given warrant to familiarities between young people of different sexes: though the kiss of peace, of friendship, nay of love itself, may be innocent

and void of offence, yet mark me, neighbours, I recommend it not, especially to the adult; I say unto you, as the wise man saith, "Give not your lips unto women, for in the lips there is as it were a burning fire; for ye know that a whore is a deep ditch, and a strange woman is a narrow pit."


Ezekiel Daw had scarce concluded this harangue, when the Justice and his clerk, having broken up their council, entered the room. The warrant under the hand and seal of Blachford was now completed, and the constable directed to take his prisoner into safe custody, and deliver him into the hands of the keeper of the county gaol. And now his worship was about to break up the assembly, when Ezekiel once more stood forward, and begged leave to say a few words on the score of humanity, touching the condition of the prisoner. "Say on, Ezekiel," quoth the Justice, "but be not long-winded, for we have already devoted much time and pains to the examination of this business."


"May it please your Worship," said Ezekiel, "to be reminded that the day is now far spent, and the county gaol lieth at a considerable distance, wherefore I do humbly conceive,

seeing the unhappy youth, whom you have thought fit to commit thereunto, is forely maimed and aggrieved, that you will not find it needful to send him forth upon his way this evening; furthermore, I do with all submission take leave to suggest unto your Worship, that this his wounded and painful condition may move your humanity to recommend unto the keeper of the gaol, not to load his limbs with fetters, one of which is already, by the visitation of Providence, sufficiently disabled to answer all the purposes of confinement, and secure him from escape, which I understand to be the only salvo that the law of the land acknowledges as any justification for that barbarous and else unwarrantable practice. Now, if it please your Worship to empower your poor servant in Christ to signify this your desire unto the gaoler (who, permit me to observe to you, is but of a merciless fraternity) I do purpose, God permitting me, to accompany this poor creature unto the prison, yea, even into the dungeon thereof, unless I am otherwise let and withstood in such my purposed visitation; which being permitted, I will then and there impart unto him such your worship's charitable admonition,

and also do my utmost to move his bowels of mercy till he shall thereunto accord."


"Ezekiel," cried the Justice, "I have heard you with great patience; but I shall not think fit to make more waste of my time in listening to a methodist's sermon, which has nothing to do with the business in question, now dismissed and done with: the fellow must go to gaol, and it must be left to the discretion of the gaoler how to deal with him when he is there."


"I am unlearned, Worshipful Sir," replied Ezekiel, "and easily persuaded of my own deficiencies, yet I had hope you would have been dispos'd to pardon my poor manner of speaking, seeing that I spoke humbly as I ought, and in christian charity for a fellow creature, whom, if guilty, we have no right to torture, if innocent, every call to protect and spare; but if these words are offensive to your Worship's ears, and the motives such as your Worship does not approve, I will be no longer tedious unto you: I stand corrected, and am silent."

At this moment Henry cast a look upon his humble advocate, which guilt never counterfeited, and sensibility could not exceed; it

was as much as heart could say to heart; the words which accompanied it were few and simple.—"God reward you for your goodness!"—was all that he could utter; and let my reader ask his heart if there was need of more.
The Justice now retired, the constable and his assessors laid their hands upon the prisoner, and a cord being provided for securing his arms, they were proceeding in a very rough manner to apply it, when Ezekiel, who kept a watchful eye upon their proceedings, cried out in a loud tone of voice—"I take God to witness against you, if you treat him with any wanton cruelty: he is your prisoner, it is true, but the law holds no man guilty till conviction. The truth will come to light! the truth will come to light!"

In the very instant, whilst these prophetic words were on his lips, behold Alexander Kinloch hastily entered the room, and calling out to the people, who were handcuffing the prisoner, bade them to desist from meddling with that guiltless person.
Astonishment seized the whole company. Ezekiel Daw could not contain his joy.—"Beautiful are the feet of those who bring

glad tidings of peace," he exclaimed in a transport.—"What talk you of the feet!" cried Alexander, "beautiful indeed is the hand of the surgeon, beautiful is his art; aye, and you may think yourselves happy that I am here living amongst you to dress your wounds, and heal your hurts, and snatch you as it were out of the very jaws of death, as I have done by Thomas Weevil. A beautiful figure any one of you wou'd make with a deep gash in the skull, and another in the ribs, if there was nobody but Mother May to dress your sores; fore gad, she wou'd cook a dinner for the worms before the parson cou'd say grace to it; but ars medendi artium ars est: now there is none of you knows what that means, and yet they are Hippocrates's own words, and he that finds them out, finds out more than any here will have the wit to discover. A pretty set of heads truly are your's, my wise neighbours, to let the villain go loose, and tie up the innocent man. Why, Bowsey is the rogue that did the job for Tom Weevil; this poor lad was his rescuer and defender; aye, and wou'd have sav'd him from all manner of hurt or harm, if he wou'd have listen'd to his warning; but then, indeed, I should not

have had the credit of bringing him to life again, nor he the pleasure of being cur'd by my hands. And now, master constable, you will do well to betake yourself to his worship, and move him to revoke his mittimus, for here comes old Thomas Weevil himself, and he will verify every word that I have been telling you."

The miller now made his appearance, and entering the justice's private chamber with Kinloch, there gave such an account of the affair, from the authority of his son, whose head, though roughly treated, had not been deprived of recollection, as made it necessary for Blachford to give orders for setting Henry at large.
Great was the joy and exultation of Ezekiel Daw upon this occasion, and not the less for the credit he took to himself in having given proof of his superior sagacity in discovering the innocence of the suspected person, in spite of all the circumstances urged against him. It is, however, to be lamented, that the stir and bustle of the crowd was now too great to admit of Ezekiel's being heard, who had so fair an occasion of displaying his eloquence; but though he frequently called

for attention, crying out,—"Hear me, neighbours, hear me I beseech you; I am a man of few words," yet all was in vain, they neither gave ear to his words, nor is it quite so certain that they would have been only a few, had they given ear to them; so the matter dropt, and his eloquence was strangled in the birth.


CHAPTER XI. When the Heart is right, the Man will be respectable, though his Humours are ridiculous.
WHEN old Weevil returned from Blachford's chamber with the order of release, he came up to Henry, and taking him cordially by the hand, declared before all present, that it was to his courage and humanity he ow'd the preservation of his son's life; he lamented the hurt he had got in his defence, offered him his house, purse, and every assistance in his power; confessed that the whole blame of the fray on the green rested with his son, and added with an oath, that he had been cruelly dealt by, both then and in the present case, and that he had told Justice

Blachford as much to his face,—"For why?" cried he; "'tis a sin and a shame, to give evil for good to this poor lad, who in the short time he has been a stranger amongst us, has sav'd his master from drowning, and my boy from being murder'd; and what has he got for it?—why truly, he has been stock'd, maim'd, and imprison'd.—Shame upon such treatment! say I; nay, I'm not afraid to say, and I care not who hears me; shame upon such justices! and now they tell me," added he, addressing himself to Henry, "your master has turn'd you away: if so, my lad, come to the mill, and so long as there's a wheel that turns, you shall never want a day's work, and a day's pay."

Henry thank'd him for all his offers, but desired to set him right about his master, from whom he had received the kindest treatment; and as for leaving his service, that, he assured the miller, was entirely his own act and deed, for which he had certain reasons, that by no means applied to the person of Doctor Cawdle.—"No, no," said Kinloch, "we know well enough which way those reasons look, and that person, I can tell you, is in a terrible taking at your leaving us: as

for the Doctor, he will give you a hearty welcome; and for my part, my good lad, I have such a soft side towards you, that if you will buckle to the business, and observe what I shall teach you, I will make a man of you, and perhaps enable you in time to perform as great a cure as I hope to perfect on the body of neighbour Weevil's son, who, by the Doctor's indisposition, is happily fallen under my hands."

The crowd now dispersed, and evening being advanced, Henry's ankle withal in no condition for journeying, he was constrained to forego his engagement to Susan, and accepted the friendly invitation of Ezekiel Daw, to pass the night at the cottage of Mother May, where that good creature took up his abode.
When Ezekiel had refreshed his guest with such humble viands as his store contained, and Goody May had again fomented his ankle, Henry, having now appeased two importunate solicitors, pain and hunger, began to make those grateful acknowledgments which his heart suggested, till he was stopped short by both parties at once, who silenced him by protesting they would not be thanked for doing

nothing more than common humanity required of them to do.—"As for me, said Ezekiel, "I declare unto you in verity, that this hath been unto me an occasion of triumph and ovation, and if thou, Henry, had'st turned out other than a true man and an honest, I would hardly have been persuaded to put faith in the index of the human heart any more; but thou hast verified the hand-writing of nature in thy features, and my bowels did not yearn towards thee without reason. Truly, young man, my heart rejoiceth in thy deliverance, and great is my joy that thou art found innocent in the sight of thine enemies; therefore will I sing and give praise with the best member that I have; and thou, Goody May, although thy pipe is but feeble, shalt bear thy part in the melody."

This said, the good man uttered a dolorous hum, by way of pitch-note, which was echoed by dame May in a shrill octave, and then, delivering out the first line of John Hopkins's 108th psalm, he set up his note with so loud and nasal a twang, as made Henry almost jump from his seat, and with more fervency than melody, chanted forth the aforesaid psalm, accompanied after a fashion

by the dame, till having travelled together through Sichem and the vale of Succoth, they found themselves deeply engaged in the following stanza, viz.

Moab my wash-pot is, my shoe
O'er Edom I will throw,
Upon the land of Palestine
In triumph I will go.—

When behold, Alexander Kinloch, without any ceremony, bolted into the room, just in time to hear Ezekiel roar forth his intended triumphs over the land of Palestine, upon which, in a harsh north-british key, so totally at discord with the psalmody as to bring it to a sudden stop, he instantly cried out,—"What the plague possesses you now, brother doctor, to be triumphing over Palestine at such a rate? if you set up your howl there, let me tell you, the Turks will soon stop your pipes with a tight cord round your gullet, and a short dance at the end of your song. Why, man, I know the ground every inch of it: when I was surgeon's mate of the old Dreadnought, I was in the thick of the infidels at Scanderoon, and Saint John D'Acre, and Alexandria, and where not. Zooks and blood!

if you was as bold as Prester John, being a Frank as you are, they would set you on the back of a scurvy ass, and buffet you through the streets for their sport. No, no, friend Daw, be advis'd by a brother surgeon, and stick to Old England while you can; here you may sing psalms, and preach sermons, and scare old women into fits, by prophesying the end of the world out of trees and turnip carts, but meddle not with Mahomet, till you are prepared for a short trip into Paradise, with a bowstring round your throat."

Ezekiel Daw, in his early years, had been trained to the art of handling the pestle, and pounding drugs in the rural laboratory of a petty retailer of medical wares; he had there acquired as much knowledge in pharmacy and surgery, as served him to set up Goody May in the humble art of curing broken shins and bloody noses, by which she picked up a pittance amongst her poor neighbours, and sometimes entrenched so far upon Doctor Cawdle's practice, as to administer a dose of buckthorn or jalap, for scouring the bowels of the peasantry, after a drunken bout or surfeit at a Christmas feast. This was not altogether overlooked by Kinloch, though he

held her art in too much contempt to make public his complaint of it; still he took all occasions that fell in his way of giving her a dab of his ridicule, as we have already instanced, and this was not confined to her only, but extended to her friend and teacher, Ezekiel, whom in his gayer moments (and this now present was pre-eminently of that sort) he dignified, in the way of irony, with the title of Brother Doctor; and indeed that worthy person was very generally stiled by his poorer neighbours, particularly those of his his own flock, not ludicrously, but reverentially, Doctor Daw.
He was a thin spare man, of a pale and fallow complexion, about the age of fifty, upright in his person, and stiff as a hedge-stake, with yellow perpendicular hair; he was by nature irascible, and of a bilious habit, but, by long temperance and religious self-correction, had humbled and subdued his spirit so as to be patient under insults; in short, he was a creature compounded of most benevolent and excellent qualities, with a strong tincture of enthusiasm over all; in the mean while it must be owned that Ezekiel had no objection to a little amicable controversy; and there is reason

to believe, that if he had any leaning to one side more than the other in the handling of a question, it was to that side where his own opinion took post.
It was therefore no small proof of his controul over himself, that though he was thus cut short in his pious melody by the North Briton, yet he was content to pass it off with a simple remark to his visitor, that he was under a mistake in supposing he had any design of undertaking a voyage to the Holy Land, (properly so called) his humble endeavours aspiring no higher than to keep himself holy in the land where he lived; with this intent he had been giving God thanks in an hymn for the deliverance of the guiltless youth there present; "and I trust," added he, "thou didst not jeer at the matter of the hymn itself, but simply at the unworthiness of the performer." Then, turning to Kinloch, with a complacent smile, he said, "And thou too, brother Alexander, art entitled to a blessing, not only as being the bearer of glad tidings, but the instrument, as I hope, under Providence, of saving the life of our wounded neighbour."


"Yes, truly," cried Kinloch, with a significant nod, "the man may thank Providence

for falling into my hands, and not those of some others, who shall be nameless; but I believe, friend Ezekiel, after all, he must be indebted to my skill for his cure, and to nothing else, for if I were to leave my patients to the care of Providence—"
"Scoff not at Providence," quoth Ezekiel, interrupting him, "nor give thyself the glory, let thy skill be what it may. I speak not in disparagement of thy skill, friend Kinloch, but there is one, without whose helping grace we can do nothing praise-worthy: I myself, (far be it from me to vaunt of my own performances) have done something in the medical way, yet did I never hand a dose to the lips of a patient without a previous ejaculation to Providence that it might operate for his benefit."—"And you had reason," rejoined the man of medicine; "for when irregulars prescribe, 'tis the mercy of Providence if their patients escape; but in the regular practice, should a man follow these vagaries, he would be the ridicule of the Faculty: we know the effect of our medicines, and apply them confidently and timeously; and when the life of the patient is quivering on his lips, must fall to without waiting to say grace: had you, like me, been in the heat of

an action at sea, when all is smoke and thunder and blood and brains around you, you would find something else to do besides preaching and praying and setting up your pipes to the tune of Sternhold and Hopkins."


"Vent not thy jests at psalmody and prayer," replied Ezekiel, exalting his voice, and rising from his seat, as was his manner when in earnest discourse: "Hast not thou read how Saul was delivered from the evil spirit by the harping of David? Nay, is it not affirmed, in the history of our own country, that holy monarchs have had the power of healing the king's evil with a touch?"—"Yes," answered Kinloch, "but I no more believe it than I do that you can set a broken bone by a stave of Sternhold."—"Well, well," rejoined Ezekiel, "if thou art resolved to be faithless against sacred proof, thou wilt not deny the efficacy of music against the sting of the tarantula."—"Indeed but I will," cried the other; "and I hold the notion in like contempt with stories of the black art and old women's fables. Why, man, I have sojourn'd in the countries where those reptiles are found, and I give it you upon my word for so mere a flam, that I had rather suffer the bite of the creature itself than the

noise and nonsense of the pretended cure. In short, my good Ezekiel, let us talk a little reason, and wave all canting for a while: every man in his own way: you are for King David, I am for Hippocrates; you are for glad'ning the heart of man with psalms and canticles, I am for curing his ailments with plaisters and potions: there's work enough for each, and neither of us can do both at once."


"Pardon me," interposed Henry; "I think a man may do the duty of a Christian and that of any other art or profession under heaven: the church does not call upon you above one day in seven."—"And if the bell was chiming in one ear," said Kinloch, "and a woman in labour crying out in the other, which would you have me turn to?"—"Certainly to the woman," replied Henry; "and I doubt not but our good Ezekiel would break off, and run to save a fellow-creature from drowning, tho' he were in the middle of a prayer."—"Assuredly I would," cried the preacher; "but that will not decide the case; if no man absented himself from God's worship but upon such good and substantial reasons as these which have been mention'd, your churches wou'd be a pretty deal fuller than they are:

there would then be no call for such supernumerary teachers as myself. But whilst there is such a parcel of idlers amongst our common people, who make every thing a pretence for hanging back from their regular duty, it may be well for the community that there are some like myself, who will be at the pains of gathering up the stragglers, and compelling them to come in, though it be from the highways and hedges."


"Thou hast said it in a word," cried Henry, reaching out his hand to the preacher, "and art a candid soul; he that, hearing this, shall attempt to turn thy humble piety into ridicule, must have a heart of stone."

These words put an end to the controversy; and honest Ezekiel, lifting a stone pitcher by the ear, which he had placed upon the table, filled out a can of ale to each of his guests, and after for himself; then shaking Alexander by the hand, with a smile of perfect reconciliation and benignity, cried, "Come, brother Doctor, here's a cup of thanks to you, and a speedy recovery to your patient."

This gave a turn to the conversation; the occurrences of the day were now discussed; Weevil's wounds were scientifically descanted

upon by the journeyman surgeon, who, knowing Ezekiel's ignorance of the learned languages, and not suspecting Henry of any acquaintance with them, took occasion to interlard his discourse with scraps of barbarous Latin, not forgetting in the mean time to give a proper sprinkling of his own praises, with a fly stroke every now and then at his master Zachary still doing penance for his ducking at the ford. He was earnest with Henry to return to the shop, encouraging him to it by many reasons, and promising him a speedy deliverance from Jemima, whose case he pronounced upon as desperate. Henry shook his head at this, and said no more than that he should pay his duty to the Doctor as soon as his sprain would permit him. This again drew some learned demurs from Alexander as to Goody May's embrocation of camphorated spirits of wine and bullock's gall, which Ezekiel, on his part, as learnedly defended. The pitcher in the mean time was emptied; and then Alexander, recollecting a multiplicity of business, took his leave.

"Child," cried Ezekiel, as soon as Kinloch had departed, "the good dame and I have provided for thy repose under this roof; thou wilt find a bed comfortable and cleanly, altho'

it be but an humble one: the hour indeed is yet early, but thou hast had a toilsome day, and art maimed withal; a little rest, with the good woman's fomentation, will set all to rights; yet, before we part, I must not forget to commend thee for the prudent and pious rebuke thou didst give to our neighbour Kinloch, when he spoke scoffingly and irreverently in thy hearing; I must no less applaud thee for the brevity of thy reply, for thou art yet too young and unlearned in these matters to handle them argumentatively and at large: it well becometh thee to distrust thine own abilities for that task; but when I have put my thoughts together, and digested them at leisure, I will more fully instruct thee how to silence all such cavils as the scorners can oppose to thee, and will give thee such rules and lessons as shall fortify thy faith against all that he, or any other unbeliever, can invent to shake it."

Henry made a suitable reply; Ezekiel stalk'd away with dignity to his cockloft; the hospitable dame conducted our hero to a little cabin, where she had prepared a bed for him, and the peaceful cottage was soon hushed to silence and repose.

END OF THE SECOND BOOK.



BOOK THE THIRD.

CHAPTER I. A Dissertation, which our Readers will either sleep over, or pass over, as best suits them.
AN author will naturally cast his composition in that kind of style and character, where he thinks himself most likely to succeed; and in this he will be directed by considering, in the first place, what is the natural turn of his own mind, where his strength lies, and to what his talents point; and secondly, by the public taste, which, however much it is his interest to consult, should not be suffered to betray him into undertakings he is not fitted for.
Novels, like dramas, may certainly be composed either in the tragic or comic cast, according to the writer's choice and fancy. Tales of fiction, with mournful catastrophes, have been wrought up with very considerable effect; I could name some of the pathetic sort, which are uncommonly beautiful and

deeply interesting; their success might well encourage any author, who has powers and propensities suitable, to copy the attempt; on the other hand, examples muster strongest for the story with a happy ending: middle measures have also been struck upon by some, and novels of the tragi-comic character aptly and ingeniously devised, which, after agitating the passions of terror and pity, allay them with the unexpected relief of happiness and good fortune in the concluding scenes.
By all or any of these channels, the author may shape his course to fame, if he has skill to shun the shoals of insipidity on the one hand, and the rocks of improbability on the other; in one word, if he will keep the happy mean of nature. Exquisitely fine are those sensations, which the well-wrought tale of pity excites; but double care is required to guide them to the right point, because they are so penetrating: whoever stirs those passions in a guilty cause may do infinite mischief, for they sink into young and tender hearts, and where they sink, they leave a deep and permanent impression; they are curious instruments in the hand of the artist, but murderous weapons in the possession of the assassin.

Cheerful fictions, with happy endings, are written with more ease, and have less risk as to the moral; they play about the fancy in a more harmless manner; the author is seldom so careless of his characters as not to deal out what is termed poetical justice amongst them, rewarding the good and punishing the unworthy; pride and oppression are rarely made to triumph ultimately; engaging libertinism seldom fails to reform; and true love; after all its trials, is finally crowned with possession.
The mixt or composite sort, which steer between grave and gay, yet are tinctured with each, deal out terror and suspense in their progress; artfully interwoven into the substance of the fable, for the purpose of introducing some new and unforeseen reverse of fortune at the story's close, which is to put the tortured mind at rest. This demands a conduct of some skill; for if the writer's zeal for the introduction of new and striking incidents, wherein consists the merit of this species of composition, be not tempered by a due attention to nature, character and probability, the whole web is broken, and the work falls to the ground: in good hands it becomes a very pleasing production, for the curiosity is kept

alive through the whole progress of the narrative, and the mind that has been suspended between hope and fear, at last subsides in perfect satisfaction with the just and equitable event of things.
A novel may be carried on in a series of letters or in regular detail; both methods have their partisans, and in numbers they seem pretty equally divided; which of the two is the more popular, I cannot take upon myself to say; but I should guess that letters give the writer most amusement and relief, not only from their greater diversity of style, but from the respite which their intermissions afford him. These advantages however have a counterpoise, for his course becomes more circuitous and subject to embarrassment, than when he takes the narrative wholly into his own hands; without great management and address in keeping his dates progressive, and distinctly methodized, his reader is exposed to be called back and puzzled; and as the characters who conduct the correspondence must be kept asunder, the scene is oftentimes distracted, where we wish it to be entire, or else the intercourse of letters is made glaringly unnatural and pedantic by compressing the distances from which they are

dated, and putting two people to the ridiculous necessity of writing long narratives to each other, when conversation was within their reach.
For myself, having now made experiment of both methods, I can only say, that were I to consult my own amusement solely, I should prefer the vehicle of letters: this however must be acknowledged, that all conversations, where the speakers are brought upon the scene, are far more natural when delivered at first hand, than when retailed by a correspondent; for we know that such sort of narratives do not commonly pass by the post, and the letter, both in style and substance, appears extremely stiff, tedious, and pedantic. Upon the whole, I should conjecture that the writer is best accommodated by the one, and the reader most gratified by the other: I hope I am right in my conjecture as to the reader's preference of the method I am now pursuing, else I have chosen ill for myself, and gained no credit by the sacrifice.



CHAPTER II. A Morning Visit, which produces a suspicious Situation.
WITH the first dawn of the morning, the disconsolate Susan May set out in search of her beloved Henry, whom she had eagerly expected the evening before, and whose breach of promise she was at a loss to account for. A thousand anxious thoughts occupied her mind, and the suspicion that he had now totally renounced her was not the least of her alarms. She went directly to her mother's cottage, and, having met no one by the way, was ignorant of the events which had caused her disappointment.
Ezekiel Daw was an early riser, and had already sallied out; but Henry, to whom Goody May had hospitably resigned her bed, was still buried in profound repose, and sleeping off the fatigues of the preceding day. The cottage door being open, and no surly porter to guard it, the damsel, without let or hindrance, made strait way to the little chamber

where her mother slept, and entering it without noise, to her great surprise discovered not the good old dame within the sheets, but the youthful object of her passion, fast in the arms of Morpheus, and glowing with the rosy tints of health and beauty. It was a scene for eyes less interested than those of Susan to contemplate with admiration; she gazed upon him with rapture and delight. A considerable time she stood fixt and motionless, balancing in her mind betwixt the propriety of retiring out of the chamber and the pleasure of remaining in it. The longer she indulged her senses in the contemplation of his person, the less inclined she was to sacrifice the enjoyment of them: love and desire suggested to her a variety of expedients, which timidity and discretion would not yet permit her to accord to. Curiosity was urgent with her to be resolved how it came to pass that Henry should be sleeping in her mother's bed. This same curiosity prompted her to wake him, and love was forward to instruct her in the mode; a gentle pressure of his hand effected the wished-for purpose. He started, waked, and hastily cried out—"Ah, Susan, is it you? How came you hither?"—This was enough

to introduce an explanation, which in few words told all that either party was interested to be informed of. Events so full of terror to the feelings of a heart sensitive as Susan's, though related simply and without exaggeration by the object of her affection, had so agitated her, that either feigning or really feeling inability to keep her feet, she had suddenly sunk down upon the side of the bed, and by an action seemingly involuntary, clasped one of his hands in both her's, whilst lamenting over his sufferings with sighs and tears of sympathy and condolence.
When the tale was at an end, and his deliverance announced, the fond girl raised her eyes to heaven in silent thankfulness, and then glancing them upon the youth with an expression that left nothing in her heart untold, dropt lifeless as it were upon his neck, and laid without motion in his arms.
In this moment truth compels me to acknowledge that the forbearance even of Henry was sore beset and staggered under the attack. Nature (shame upon her!) played a treacherous part to undermine his resolution; she hurried through his veins like a spell, raised a tumult in his heart, and made every nerve in

his frame tremble with her touch. Reason, indeed, the governor of the citadel, and conscience, the centinel of the soul within it, were upon their post, but uncollected and surprised, and scarce half-armed for a defence, when, in the moment of danger, their guardian spirit sent a rescue in the person of the rural apostle, Ezekiel Daw himself, who no sooner darted his visitatorial eye upon the bodies of the two persons prostrate on the bed, and folded in each other's arms, than having discovered that one of the said bodies belonged to the male and the other to the female sex, he shrieked out in a key of horror and surprise—"Children of the serpent! impure vessels of perdition! what in the name of Beelzebub are you about? Loose your embraces, I command you, and renounce the sinful temptations of the flesh! Oh Henry! Henry ! son of Belial! have I for this stood forth in thy defence! have I for this combated the allegations of the witnesses who accused thee of incontinence with this damsel! and must I now revoke the good opinion I had conceived of thee! Inconsiderate youth, hast thou never read of the continence of Joseph? hast thou never been told of that other illustrious person (I forget his name) in Pagan

story, who fled the allurements of a beautiful captive? Wilt thou yield in virtue to a heathen? wilt thou be outdone in chast forbearance by a worshipper of filthy idols, by one of the Gentile nations of a reprobate generation, a child of wrath cast out from the redemption of Israel, and sealed to everlasting torment in the fires of hell? Can you tell me that this damsel, sightly although she be, shall vie in charms with Potiphar's wife? I tell thee she is no more to compare with Potiphar's wife, than a crow to a peacock. And thou, Susan May, I have noted thee, Susan May, for tiring thy hair, and bedecking thy person with lures and traps to catch the wandering eyes of men; I have reprov'd thee for it, but my admonition hath been lost upon thee; thou hast wantonly array'd thyself, Susan May, and because nature hath bestow'd upon thee a comely form, thou hast studied to set it off by the artifice of dress, whereas thou oughtest in all decent care to have conceal'd it from the sight of men, to have cover'd it with the veil of modesty, yea, even to have disguis'd and disfigur'd it, rather than to let it be unto thee a stumbling block, and an occasion of falling."



"Pardon me, sir," cried Susan, "I am not fallen in the manner you suppose; I was sorrow-struck with the account of what Henry has suffer'd since I saw him, and my affliction overpower'd me. I believe I fell into a kind of fit, and so he caught me in his arms. I hope it is neither sin nor shame to sympathize with the unfortunate and innocent. If to love him be a crime, I am guilty indeed."—"What tellest thou me of love?" resumed the preacher; "thou art too young and unlearn'd to know what love means: thou shou'd'st be taught that by them who are older and wiser than thyself; I have studied it, child, and revolv'd it in my mind, and I do pronounce upon experience and reflection, that the true and only love is the fulfilling of the law; therefore, tell me not that thou lovest this youth, for thou hast no such thing about thee; I do aver that thou hast a war in thy members, and where war is, how can love exist?"

Henry now interposed, and in an humble tone gently requested Ezekiel not to chide the damsel, who was not in the offence, having entered his chamber in the presumption of finding her mother there; and he furthermore

most solemnly assured him, that their conversation had been strictly innocent. "Heaven forbid," said he, "I shou'd be such a villain as to repay the hospitality of the mother, by doing wrong to the daughter. Did you know me, I flatter myself these asseverations wou'd be needless; you wou'd not doubt my honour; but if you still suspect me as being a stranger to you, this worthy girl is not such, and I shou'd hope you wou'd be slow to believe her wanting in virtue and discretion, merely because her tender heart is susceptible of pity and compassion. What she has told you is perfect truth; my sad story affected her; she sunk upon the bed, and I receiv'd her in my arms. Is there a man living who wou'd not have done the same? I am sure you wou'd, for I have good reason to believe your arms are ever open to the feeble and afflicted."


"Child," replied Ezekiel, "I believe thee; I cannot help believing thee; there is something in thy countenance that extorts from me my good opinion, and I give perfect credit to thy words from the impression I receive by thy looks; but now that the damsel no longer needeth thy support, prudence warneth thee to desist from a conference, which may produce

another sinking on her part, and more embracing on thine; in place of which I do counsel thee to turn thyself on thy pillow, and compose thy spirits, that so thou mayest atone for the wandering of thy thoughts by meditation and prayer: meanwhile the damsel, whose eye betokeneth a disturb'd imagination, shall withdraw with me, that I may breathe into her mind the words of peace, forasmuch as I perceive the evil one yet worketh in her, whom it now behoveth me to put to flight."

Ezekiel now took his unwilling disciple by the hand, and led her into the cottage kitchen, where, having seated her on one side of the chimney, and himself in a huge wicker chair on the other, he began the following exhortatory discourse:

"I will speak unto thee, damsel, of love, whereby thou wilt gain instruction how to think rightly of it in future, and avoid that false notion which hath misled thy young and inexperienced imagination. Thou didst say, that if to love thy friend Henry were a crime, thou wast guilty indeed: now to love him as a brother is thy duty; if thou dost that, there is no crime in thy love: search thine heart therefore, and if thou dost there discover any

other emotions or yearnings towards the youth than thou mightest innocently indulge towards a brother, or a sister, or a friend of thine own sex, banish those sensations at a word, for they are of the evil one; verily I pronounce them to be abominable, and not to be excus'd."


"But what method shall I take to banish them," said Susan?—"By mortifying the flesh with fasting," replied Ezekiel, "and giving thyself up to holy exercises."—"Indeed, sir," cried the poor girl, "I never neglect my prayers; but then I always pray for Henry; and as to fasting, if I was to starve myself to death, I shou'd never get him out of my thoughts."—"Go to," exclaimed Ezekiel, "thou art a nonsense girl to prate to me in this fashion. Wilt thou, who art no better than an unfledg'd gosling, barely out of the shell, pretend to argue with me, who have weigh'd, and consider'd, and perpended all these matters? aye, let me tell thee, and experienc'd them also, for I will now relate to thee what occur'd unto myself: When I was stripling, and work'd as hireling to my master the apothecary, his niece, a sightly damsel like thyself, came one evening into the shop, whilst I was at the mortar, and being not a little taken

with my aptitude in handling the pestle, methought she cast the eyes of affection upon me; she approached near unto me, and with the most condescending familiarity, graciously leant her arm upon my shoulder; in that instant I began to feel the stirrings of the serpent tempting to unlawful desires.—'Ezekiel,' quoth she, 'thou art an industrious lad; but dost thou not think thou cou'dst find more pleasing amusement than that of pounding these stinking drugs?'—'Miss,' said I, 'the drugs may be unsavoury, but honest industry is sweet, and tendeth to obtain the grateful odour of a good name.' With that she seis'd the pestle in her grasp, and wou'd have wrench'd it from my hand. I resolutely maintain'd my hold, and bade her to avoid the shop, and not interrupt me in my duty—but how now, child! where are thy thoughts a gadding? thou dost not mark me."


"Oh! yes, sir," replied Susan, "I do; but what answer did the young lady make to you?"—"Not a word," quoth Ezekiel; "not a syllable; but with a toss of her head and a sneer, that gave me to understand she was offended at my plainness, turn'd out of the shop, and never said a civil thing to me again. Learn

henceforth, child, from this example, to repel thy unruly passions in their first approach, for the victory is easy; face the tempter and he will fly from thee."—"Dear sir," said Susan, "if I was not afraid of angering you, I shou'd make bold to say a few words with your leave."—"Say on," quoth Ezekiel, "in God's name."—"You are very good to me, and I know you always advise me for the best, but though I'll do all in my power, I shou'd be a hypocrite if I was to say I will do all that you bid me: consider, every body has not the wisdom and resolution that you have; you are a man, I am a weak woman; I cou'd no more give Henry the answer that you gave to the apothecary's niece, than I can fly in the air. Lackaday! when once love lays hold of the heart—"
"Lays hold of a fiddle stick!" cried Ezekiel; "it is your business not to let love lay hold on any thing; you must drive him to a distance."

At this instant Henry entered the room; Susan's eyes glistened with joy; Ezekiel's expostulation vanished from her thoughts; even his pestle and mortar no longer sounded in her ears; she had no senses but for the object in her sight.

Dame May entered the cottage; she ran to her daughter, took her in her arms, and welcomed her home; she was the darling of her mother: Henry's honest nature could not allow him to suppress any thing that had passed between himself and Susan in her mother's absence. When he had related this to the good dame with all that air of sincerity that was natural to him, she, like Ezekiel, immediately assured him of her entire belief in every thing he had said, and without qualifying it after Doctor Daw's manner, with any admonitory inferences, she candidly observed, that nothing was more natural than for young folks that liked each other, to steal a kiss when it came in their way, and no harm done: "For why?" added she, turning to Ezekiel, "we must not forget that we have been young in our day as well as they."

This was such point-blank heresy against the doctrines of the good man, just now inculcated, that he stared with amazement upon Dame May; she, who had only nature and not one ray of philosophy to guide her, was not aware of the reproof she was open to, and before Ezekiel could pump the words up out of his throat, exclaimed—"Lord love

your sweet heart, Mr. Daw, you are surely the best soul living, but you don't consider what it is to be young; why love in them is as it were a second nature, and for us to argue against it is all one as though we were to preach against the light of the sun."


"Hold your tongue, woman," cried Ezekiel; "it is not for an ignoramus like you to talk about preaching. Have I spent my breath for nought? am I become like sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal? are you a preacher, or am I? have you the gift, have you the calling, have you the election? Silence, vain woman! and be in subjection to the higher powers. I have told thy daughter that she is in nowise to think of love, it becometh not young people so much as to meditate thereupon; and wilt thou now tell her that it is as it were a second nature? Wilt thou provoke the cravings of thy child, till, like the horse-leach's daughter, she crieth out, Give, give?"

Dame May perceived that she had nettled the good man without intending it, and therefore began to soften his anger, by assuring him that she never meant to cast a reflection upon his preaching, to the contrary of which, she

had always affirmed that there was nobody to compare with him in the neighbourhood, nay, she might say not in all the county, for a sermon; but she hoped there was no offence in supposing he had not turned his thoughts to love-matters.

"There lies your mistake," quoth Ezekiel, "for of all the human infirmities it is that which I have studied with the most calm and deliberate attention, having never in any instant of my life given way to it myself, and of consequence am the fittest person on that account to give good counsel to others, who are betray'd into that unpardonable weakness."

Here Henry smiled; but what passed in his thoughts to provoke that smile, as he did not discuss, we shall not presume to conjecture. Goody May proceeded after her placid manner to prepare for breakfast: Susan bestowed some stolen glances upon Henry, which did not altogether promise an implicit obedience to the injunctions of her spiritual pastor, and might fairly raise a doubt whether she had made even the smallest progress in a reform, by dismissing him from her thoughts. Ezekiel was not the quickest observer of these tokens, that ever lived, and had moreover at

this moment fixed his attention upon a smoaking bason of fresh milk-porridge.


CHAPTER III. Fortune begins to smile upon our Hero.
ALEXANDER Kinloch having visited his patient at the mill, called at the cottage, and made so favourable a report of his own wonderful performances, and the good night's rest that he had procured for the wounded man, that little doubt was now entertained of his speedy recovery. In fact, good fortune, and the critical interposition of Henry, had done more for him than all the art of Alexander, for the knife had simply glanced upon his ribs, and made a flesh wound, neither deep nor dangerous, and the blood which it drew, though formidable in appearance, was eventually no more than the young miller in his state of inflammation could well spare, with profit to his habit and constitution.
Kinloch delivered a message from Doctor Cawdle, desiring Henry to come to him, as he

was yet confined to his chamber; he also repeated his prognostication that Madam Jemima was in a hasty decline.—"Say you so," quoth Ezekiel, "why then she is in the properest place to meet with good advice: her spouse no doubt will exert all his skill in her behalf."—"Her spouse indeed!" cried Kinlcch, "poor creature! what can he do? I had prepar'd a medicine for her, compounded of specifics sovereign in her case, which is neither more nor less than an inordinate use of spirituous liquors acting on an atrabilious habit."—"Then what can save her but the muzzle?" resumed Daw.—"What can save her!" echoed the medical understrapper, "my remedy cou'd have sav'd her; a compound of all antidotes against hard drinking; a butt to sheath the spicula of intoxicating potations. Know you not that there is a secret in nature, by the application of which men can swallow solid fire? so is there a preparative in medicine against the effect of liquid fire. This by deep research I had discover'd and compounded, when the desperate suicide hurl'd it in my face; the very odour of it wou'd have clear'd a brain, though inflam'd with the fumes of the brandy-bottle: other remedies I had provided

auxiliary to my grand attack, but these also she rejected, and now she is consuming away by intestine fires, for I have done with her."—"I am sorry for it," quoth Henry, "for I fear she is in no fit condition for dying."
"Truly I believe not," answered Kinloch, "yet I pronounce her a dead woman; and I never yet knew any one of my patients, when I have said that, fail to make my words good. She pretends that her election, as she calls it, is sure; but by the dread she shews of quitting this world, I shou'd much doubt if she has very hopeful prospects of the next."—"I shall make bold to talk to her on that subject," said Ezekiel.
Here the conversation was cut short by the arrival of a postchaise at the cottage-door, belonging to the Lady Viscountess Crowbery. Dame May instantly discovered the person of her noble visitor, and ran out of the house to pay her accustomed devoirs. Kinloch in the meanwhile, with his usual plea of business, hastened away; Susan prevented Henry from the like escape, by telling him Lady Crowbery called frequently on her mother, but that she did not expect she would come in: Ezekiel

said the same, simply observing that it was some charitable errand, for that worthy lady did a world of good.—"Oh! she is the best lady breathing," repeated Susan; "she has a heart for every body that suffers wrongfully, and I will lay my life she has been told of Henry's hard treatment, and is come for some good purpose to enquire about him: as sure as can be I have guess'd it, for she is this moment getting out of her postchaise, and coming into the house."

Henry had his leg upon a stool, but before Lady Crowbery made her appearance, he had raised himself upon his feet, and bowed respectfully on her entering: the noble visitor immediately fixed her eyes upon him; and then turning to Dame May; who followed her, said, "This is the young man we have been speaking of: sit down, if you please; you have strained your ankle, and I will not allow you to stand upon it on my account—sit down, or you will oblige me to go." She then made a gracious acknowledgement to Susan, and seated herself opposite to Henry. After a short silence, she began, apparently with some degree of agitation, to question him about the events of the preceding day: he briefly and

modestly related them as he was bidden.—"I think," said she, "had I been in Mr. Blachford's place, and you had told this story in your defence, as you have now repeated it to me, I cou'd not have hesitated to acquit you; but after all," added she, "we shou'd not complain of him for wanting eyes, for justice you know ought to be blind."—"But not deaf," said Ezekiel—"Right," replied Lady Crowbery; "I am apt to think there is a tone in truth, that no impartial ear can well mistake. But you, Henry (that, I understand, is your name) ought not only to be acquitted as guiltless of the crime charged upon you, you shou'd be honour'd and rewarded, for an action that bespeaks your heroism and humanity. I hope you have too much gallantry, to refuse a lady's favours. I desire you will accept this purse from me; you well deserve it, brave young man, and what is more I suspect you want it, and I have it to spare."

If the grace of giving in any degree constitutes the value of a gift (which doubtless it does) this gift came recommended by a manner, that might well apologize for our hero's receiving it with tears of sensibility, and blushes that bespoke a modest nature overpowered

by gratitude. He did not speak, but he pressed his lips upon the purse, as he took it from her hand; perhaps his aim was at the hand itself, but respect stopped him short, and he was awed from the attempt. He turned his eyes upon the countenance of his benefactress, and beheld beauty in its wane, benevolence in it's meridian. It should seem that forty years had not yet passed over her head, but of those it was too plain that a portion had been unhappy: her form was still elegant in the extreme; what it had lost in substance, it had gained in delicacy, and the inroads of sickliness and sorrow upon the freshness of her charms were atoned for by so interesting a character of pale and tender sensibility, that none but a man of gross taste would have thought that youth and health were wanting to render the person of Lady Crowbery more attractive.

"I desire," said she, "you will apply this small sum to your immediate occasions; and as I have your future fortunes at heart, I must refer you to Mr. Cawdle for advice, who has my instructions to talk with you on the subject: take no measures, however, till you have seen him, and as soon as you are able to use

your ankle, lose no time in calling upon him." This said, Lady Crowbery took a hasty leave, stept into her carriage, and departed.

"Am I in a dream," said Henry, as she turned from the door, "or is this a reality? if so, what am I to think of it?"—He spread the contents of the purse upon the table, and then turning to Ezekiel, demanded if he could account for this extraordinary present, from a person to whom he was totally unknown?—"Very naturally," replied Ezekiel; "the Lady Crowbery hath large means, and a large heart. She was a wealthy heiress, and her fortune, independant of her Lord, is very considerable: she leads a life of retirement here in that gloomy mansion, which you may see from the Parish Green, receives little company, runs into no wanton expences, and employs the superfluities of her separate income in well-chosen acts of charity. Having heard of your gallant behaviour to Miller Weevil, and the cruel treatment you received from our Justice here, where is the wonder she shou'd single you out as an object worthy of her bounty?"


"But is there not," resumed Henry, "something more than commonly liberal, in bestowing

such a sum upon a mere stranger, only because he did what humanity requir'd of him, to a fellow creature? Here are twenty guineas, if I have told them right; such benefactions are not often heard of."—"I shou'd hope," replied Daw, "that is no absolute proof they are not often bestow'd; true charity vaunteth not itself: therefore put up thy money, and be at peace; I dare say she hath had more pleasure in giving, than thou hast in receiving it." To this Henry replied, "That from what he observed in Lady Crowbery, he fear'd she had no great proportion of pleasure in her lot, affluent though it was, for he never remark'd a countenance more strongly trac'd with melancholy."

Ezekiel shook his head, and was silent. Goody May, with less reserve, took up the subject, and stopt not till she had exhausted a long chapter of lamentations over her dear lady, as she called her, concluding it with a pretty smart philippic against my Lord, which the good apostle, after many efforts, with difficulty put a stop to.
Susan in the mean while had seized every opening to throw in her word of praise, whenever Lady Crowbery was spoken of: her

eyes testified the joy she took in Henry's good fortune, and she ventured to predict he wou'd hear of further kind purposes in his favour, when he call'd upon Doctor Cawdle: "For I know," said she, "that my Lady passes many of her good deeds through his hands, and comes frequently to his house, where she has long private conferences, which my mistress us'd to be very curious about, and wou'd fain have set me upon listening, if I wou'd have been concern'd in such shabby dealings: Very likely," added she, "my Lady may intend to take you into her own service, for I have been told that her footman is about to leave her, and settle in a public-house."—"Poh!" cried Ezekiel, "her footman indeed! Come, Henry, if your leg will carry you to the Doctor's, I'll accompany you thither, and then we shall see how matters will turn up."

Henry declared he found his ankle so much strengthened, that with the help of Ezekiel's arm he would undertake the walk. Dame May furnished him also with a stout crutch-stick, and thus supported on each hand, he confidently sallied forth.



CHAPTER IV. There are Secrets in all Families.
WHILST we leave our lame hero on his slow march to Zachary's castle, we will inform our readers of a few particulars, relative to the lady we have lately introduced into our history, which may probably account for that air of melancholy, which Henry conceived he had discovered in her looks.
Cecilia Viscountess Crowbery was the daughter of Sir Andrew Adamant, a wealthy baronet of ancient descent. He became a widower soon after her birth, and had no other child: she was beautiful, accomplished, and with Sir Andrew's leave might be one of the richest heiresses in all England. Sir Andrew was a lofty man, circumspect in his oeconomy, and of a sequestered turn, living immured in his hereditary castle, far distant from the capital, in the central parts of England.
At the county races the fair Cecilia, then turned of sixteen, was permitted to make her first appearance in a public assembly. A young cornet of dragoons, by name Delapoer, the

cadet of a noble family, well known to Sir Andrew, had the honour of dancing with her. The graces of a fine person, engaging address, and the flattering attentions he paid her in the dance, made a conquest of her young and yielding heart. Sir Andrew could not altogether decline the honour of his visits, but that of his alliance he was in no humour to accept; nay, so little disposed was he to adopt the younger son of a needy baron, that he peremptorily commanded his daughter never to name him in his hearing, nor even to think of him any more. The first part of this command she strictly obeyed; the latter she was so far from complying with, that when all hope vanished of conquering his objections, she resolutely overcame her own, and set off with him on a tour to Gretna Green.
The same impetuosity of youthful passion, that drove them upon this desperate project, hurried them into imprudencies in the course of it: they were overtaken by Sir Andrew on the way, and Cecilia was torn from her lover's arms, in the last stage of her journey, too soon for the completion of the ceremony, too late for the rescue of her innocence. The burthen of her woe encreased daily, till it

swelled to a size too big for concealment: Zachary Cawdle, then practising in the neighbourhood of Sir Andrew, was secretly employed in confidential services, and a male infant, the hero of this history, was ushered into the world.
Sir Andrew's discretion did not desert him on this trying occasion: provident in his measures, he took every means of attaching Zachary to his interest, and binding him to secrecy. Cecilia travelled for her health, attended upon by him as family physician. A tour upon the continent restored her to all the freshness of her maiden bloom, and Zachary had all the credit of a cure which nature justly might have claimed some share in.
In the neighbourhood of Sir Andrew Adamant resided a very worthy clergyman, of the name of Ratcliffe, on a benefice which had been given him by the Baronet: to him also the secret was confided, and the infant left at his door as a foundling: he christened it by the name of Henry, and brought it up with great care and tenderness in his own family. Had Sir Andrew been disposed to have given his daughter to the Honourable Mr. Delapoer when her situation was made known to him,

it was then too late, for that young officer had quitted his cornetcy of dragoons and betaken himself to India, where the interest of his family had procured him an establishment, and all correspondence ceased between him and Cecilia. In about two years after the birth of Henry, Lord Crowbery paid his addresses to Cecilia, and was accepted by Sir Andrew, who gave him a considerable sum with her on the marriage, and at his death bequeathed his whole landed estate in trust to Cecilia and her heirs, in default of which it was to be at her disposal. It was now about twelve years that Sir Andrew had been dead, and from that period Lady Crowbery had privately remitted to Mr. Ratcliffe a liberal stipend year by year for the education of young Henry; but in all this time, though she had meditated on a variety of schemes for gaining a sight of her son, she had not yet found courage to put one of them into execution since the very year of her father's death, when Ratcliffe made her a visit at the family mansion, on the pretence of business, and brought Henry with him, then a child of six years of age. On this occasion her maternal feelings were such as to expose her to very imminent danger, and effectually

prevented her from hazarding another interview under the jealous eye of her Lord, whose temper, after the death of her father, soured by his disappointment of an heir, and discontented with the provisions of the will in her favour, was so totally changed, that from this time her life was made wretched by his treatment of her: the circumstance of her elopement, which during Sir Andrew's life never once escaped his lips, was now frequently cast in her teeth, and sometimes with dark and distant insinuations attached to it, which seemed to intimate that he was not without suspicion of the consequences that followed that event; and certain it is, that, in spite of all Sir Andrew's precautions, whispers had been circulated about the neighbourhood at the time, unfavourable to Cecilia, which probably some spiteful tatler might have breathed into his ears, when it was understood amongst his hangers-on that any story they could pick up to the disparagement of his unhappy lady, would be an office flattering to his ill-humour, and a step to his favour.
Under these terrors, surrounded by spies, and continually watched by a jealous tyrant, who never suffered her to pass a day out of

his sight, it cannot be wondered at if Lady Crowbery had never ventured upon any project for indulging herself with a sight of her son, nor risqued the danger of disclosing to a young man, of whose discretion she could have no positive assurance, the important secret of his birth.
When she understood, from the story of what had passed in the village, that a young man had been carried before Justice Blachford upon a false charge, who pleaded to the name of Henry and none other, an anxious curiosity tempted her to see him. Though she had no reason to suspect her son had either left his faithful guardian, Mr. Ratcliffe, or been abandoned by him, yet the name he gave in with such an air of mystery to the Justice, (which had been reported to her) dwelt strongly on her imagination, and the very first glance of her eyes upon him in the cottage-kitchen revived in her memory the traces of those features she had once, and only once, fondly contemplated. Trembling with agitation, and fearful to provoke a discovery she had not spirits to encounter, she did not dare to ask him any questions, more especially before witnesses, but gave him her purse, scarce

knowing what she did or said upon bestowing it, till, upon better recollection, she perceived there was nothing left for her but to escape as quickly as she could, and refer him for what else might follow to her confidential friend, Doctor Zachary Cawdle.
Henry in the mean while was not totally without some faint shadows of a recollection that he had somewhere, and on some occasion, at a time long distant, seen her before. Of a Lady Crowbery he was pretty certain he had heard mention, though Ratcliffe himself probably never named her in his hearing, for in matters of honourable secrecy no man living was more guarded. This idea however only floated in his brain, and he made no discovery either to Ezekiel or Goody May of what was passing in his thoughts, though openings enough were given him by the talkative dame for enquiries on his part, had he been disposed to make them.
Lady Crowbery hastened from the cottage-door to Zachary's, impatient to communicate to him her suspicions that in the person of his servant Henry she had discovered her son. "It cannot be, Madam," replied Zachary, "the name deceives you: it catches your ear,

as it did mine, when I hir'd him."—"But his looks, his age, his voice, his whole air and person accord with it."—"That must be fancy," he again observed; "what can you remember of the countenance of a child of six years old, whom you have not seen these twelve years? I might as well find a likeness for him, who never saw him since he was a babe at the breast."—"So you may think," said she, "but I look upon him with the eye of a mother; and I tell you, Zachary, he is the very picture of his father."—"Well, Madam," answered he, "that I shall not dispute with you, for that will not decide the point in question; but here is a letter that will: this I received not many days ago from parson Ratcliffe, and if you please I will read it to you."—"By all means let me hear it," said she; "how came you not to shew it to me before?"—Zachary told her he had been from home some days, and since his return confined to his chamber; and then added, "You will find by this letter that he was living in the highest favour and esteem with his preceptor; how can we suppose that he should appear in a week's time at this distance from his home a needy, naked wanderer, presenting himself

to be hir'd by the first charitable person that would give him food and lodging?"—"Heaven only knows," replied the lady; "I confess it is most improbable: but what is the date of your letter?"—"It has no date," said Zachary; and I suspect has been written at several intervals; but with your leave we'll read it through, though it is somewhat of the longest, and rambles, as you'll perceive, in his desultory manner."—"I am well acquainted with his manner," replied the lady, "and like every thing that his heart dictates and his pen expresses: say no more therefore, but begin."

Zachary unfolded the letter, put on his spectacles, and read as follows:—


Don't tell me of the army for my dear unknown; I cannot spare him even to his country: Henry is the darling of my heart; a perfect deodand; and if his undiscovered parents now should claim him of me, I would defend my property in him with life and law, unless some tender weeping mother was to prostrate herself at my feet, as a certain petitioner did at Solomon's, and humbly pray for restitution. As I am not quite so wise a king as he was, I should not

be quite so cunning in my cruelty, for I would sooner sever my own heart than wound the smallest fibre in his beloved frame.
I'll tell you, my sage Doctor, what sometimes occurs to me, in the pride of my heart: if I was not such an ugly fellow, as you know, and such a profest woman-hater, as you have sometimes had the face to tell me, when I've call'd you over the coals for your wicked doings, methinks I should be tempted to throw out a tub to the tatlers, and put myself upon the world for the father of this amiable foundling; but, alas! it is the only tub they won't swallow, for they swear I am so frightful that no woman will come near me, and if any wou'd, they pretend to say I am too pious to let them. Out upon 'em! they know little of my person, and less of my piety; for I will maintain I am a great deal handsomer than Socrates was, and not half so virtuous. Now I dare say you never took me for worse than a heathen, and, to say the truth, I have often thought you very little better than one.
Henry has been eighteen years under my eye; if I was to say he has no fault, I shou'd

be told I made a monster of him; you may suppose therefore that he has faults, but I promise you I have never found them out. He is not indeed so fat as you are, but that is his misfortune; in form and feature he is a perfect Apollo, but then he does not, like you, rival him in physic; neither does he come near him in wit, for his talents are rather solid than brilliant, and he does not know how to raise a laugh at any man's cost, for he has no powers of ridicule; in music he is still further off, he touches the pipe a little, but it is not the pipe of Hermes, neither is he fit to accompany the harp of Apollo. He has no memory; offend him, and he forgets to revenge it: he has no taste for intrigue, and tho' our rural Daphnes, peradventure, would not fly, he has no passion for pursuits of this sort. He can't drink, or he won't, so that he will never earn the character of an honest fellow, like you and me. He is the best hand in all these parts at sparring, but his art is of no use to him, for he won't quarrel. He knows Greek moderately well, Latin better, his religion best of all. I can recollect nothing that he does in your way, Doctor,

except culling of simples, for the very weeds of creation furnish him with meditations on the wonders of the Creator: you deal with them in another way; electuaries, distillations, and diet-drinks, are their destinies when they fall into your hands.
Such is my Henry. Is he fit to go forth into the world, who takes every man's word for his honesty? No, let him abide with me and obscurity, till Providence opens a path in which he may walk with innocence and serenity.
I gave him his baptismal name, and call'd him Henry: I think he should have as many as his neighbours; what think you? If so, let him be henceforth Henry Fitz-Henry!

Farewell, T. R.



Zachary having concluded the letter, waited in silence for Lady Crowbery to speak. After a considerable pause, observing her still buried in thought, he said, "I don't wonder if your Ladyship is puzzled how to make the hero of this letter and my poor Henry one and the same person."—"'Tis difficult enough to reconcile it to probability," replied Lady Crowbery, "I do confess to you; and I believe I

must relinquish my discovery. Likenesses are no certain rules to go by; yet here is a concurrence of circumstances in name and age, and, give me leave to say, in nobleness of nature: Had my Henry been in this young man's situation, cou'd he have acquitted himself more nobly? therefore, at all events, let me know the history of this youth, for were it only for his name's sake, and the impression which his countenance made upon me, I am resolv'd to be his friend. Draw from him the story which he so mysteriously with-holds, and if (which is still possible) some fatal combination of events shou'd have reduc'd my child to this distressful state, I still must bless the hand of Providence for guiding him to my protection, and, at whatever risque, will meet the dispensation, and fulfil the duties of a mother. Nevertheless it will behove us to be circumspect, for I am encompass'd with hostile and severe inspectors: shou'd you therefore unexpectedly find my first impression verified, let not surprise or curiosity lead you into discoveries that would involve us all in danger; but keep the secret of his birth untold till we can find or form occasion fit and mature for our revealing it."


This said, and promise made on Zachary's part to be attentive to her instructions, Lady Crowbery took her leave, and departed.


CHAPTER V. Our Hero relates his Adventures. A religious Controversy concludes with a Battle.
OUR hero and his friend arrived at the Doctor's gate as Lady Crowbery's carriage drove from it. Ezekiel sate down in the shop with Alexander Kinloch, whilst Henry attended Zachary's summons up stairs. He found the fat son of Apollo sitting in his nightgown and cap, and was welcomed with many hearty congratulations for his escape out of the talons of the justice, on whom Zachary bestowed many opprobrious terms, which we have neither leisure nor inclination to repeat. He touched briefly upon Henry's leaving his service, but so as to convince him he understood his motives, observing by the way, that Mrs. Cawdle was now so ill, that he apprehended her to be in danger; "but she will take nothing," added he, "that Sawney Kinloch prescribes

to her, so that she has that chance for life still; for my part, I'm in no condition to attend upon her."

Zachary had made Henry sit down to rest his leg: he now began his string of interrogatories. Had he got any service or situation in view? None. Would he come back to his old quarters? Henry shook his head, bowed, and was silent. Observing this token of dissent, Zachary smiled, and said, "I suspect, young man, you have more honesty than good policy; I doubt you did not take proper pains to recommend yourself to your mistress: the saints pay well when they are pleas'd, and I guess you do not abound: Have you any money in your pocket?" Henry exhibited the purse, and named the donor. "So, so!" cried the Doctor, "that's a great sum for a poor fellow; I suppose you never saw so much money together before."—"I have not always been in want," replied Henry. "Then I suppose your parents may have fail'd, or come into trouble, or stept aside, perhaps, and that may be the reason you don't chuse to publish your name; but you need not fear me, for I am no tell-tale."—"Nor I neither," replied Henry. "Humph!" quoth Zachary, "I believe that

most readily; but methinks it should be no reason with you for refusing to confide in me, by which you might make a friend, and such an one perhaps as cou'd render you more services than you may be aware of." He then proceeded to ask, "Had he a father living?" He had lost the only father he ever knew. "I don't comprehend you," said Zachary; "was he not your real father? Have you no other name than Henry? Was you never called Henry Fitz-Henry?" The young man started at the question, and looked him earnestly in the face. Zachary proceeded—"Did he know a clergyman in the west of England, of the name of Ratcliffe?"—"Did I know him!" exclaimed Henry; "his memory will be ever dear to me: whilst he liv'd I never knew sorrow."—"Good Heaven!" cried Zachary, "is my friend Ratcliffe dead? How sorry am I to hear it! Oh, that I had been with him in his sickness!"—"Alas!" replied Henry, "you cou'd have been of no use to him; his case defied all art; his death was instantaneous, a fall from his horse; an unmanageable, accursed animal threw him from his back, dislocated his neck, and in a moment extinguish'd a life most dear, most precious, most divine, if man can merit that

expression."—"And you are the foundling he was so fond of?" said Zachary.—"I am that disconsolate being," replied Henry, the tears streaming from his eyes. "Be comforted," said the honest accoucheur, whose heart was sympathising with Henry's, for he loved Ratcliffe, and had a tender soul; "be comforted, my dear good child, and accept of me in place of your departed friend, unworthy, I confess, to be his substitute, but still a zealous, a sincere one, as you shall find me. Ratcliffe I lov'd; he was the best of men; I know how dear you was to him; therefore you are dear to me; though he had more experience of your worth than I have, his obligations to you cou'd not be greater than mine are; for my life you have sav'd, and alas! alas! it was not in your power to save his. I'll not deceive you by professions; try me; trust me; you shall not be disappointed, or repent that Providence has brought you hither.


"I think it was the hand of Providence," replied Henry; "for what else cou'd rescue me from such distresses as I have encounter'd since I left my patron's mansion? As soon as I had seen his corpse committed to the earth, I found myself a solitary being in the world,

without a friend, without a name, without a parent that wou'd own me, or at whose door I cou'd apply for succour and relief. The house of my benefactor I neither cou'd nor wou'd abide in: I pack'd up a few clothes, and with what little money I had about me, set out upon my adventures with a servant of my deceased friend, who was going to London. The army was the resource I had in meditation. Daily labour I was not used to, private service my spirit revolted from, and a soldier's musket was at least an honourable, though a slender maintenance. On the road, it was my hard fortune to be attack'd by footpads: whilst my comrade ran off, I stood my ground, and made resistance to the robbers; being single, I was overpower'd by numbers, and left for dead, stun'd with the blow of a bludgeon on my head. A passenger had the humanity to take care of me, and brought me to his house; he was a grazier, and held a farm on the skirts of Hounslow-heath. I soon recovered from the blow, but I had lost my all; for the villains had strip'd me even of the clothes I had on: with this man I pass'd a few days, did what work I cou'd in the house as well as field, but there was certain work

within doors which I wou'd not do, and falling under the resentment of his wife, a woman of an outrageous temper, I was so represented to him, that he dismiss'd me with ignominy from his doors, pennyless and friendless. In this extremity I call'd to mind a certain good old woman, who had been a servant of Mr. Ratcliffe's, and nurs'd me in my infancy, living, as I understood, at this very town hard by, where happily I first met with you: thither I bent my course, and the rather as I had a distant hope that she could tell me something that might guide me to my parents, for I cou'd well remember being often told by her, when I was of an age to take notice of such things, that I was a gentleman born; that I had as good blood in my veins as the best man in the county, and such sort of vague prattle as nurses talk to children, and perhaps might mean nothing; yet it was a twig to catch at, and I had no better help within my reach. When you accosted me in the market-place, I had just then enquired her out, and found my only hope was lost; she had been dead some years. This with other sorrows will account for the despair you found me in; it was a state little short of absolute insensibility; your voice

recall'd me to some recollection; you rescued me from total deprivation of my reason. What has befallen me since, I need not repeat; you know it all; and thus you have the faithful abstract of my short but sad history."

The discovery being now compleat, and Lady Crowbery's conjecture fully verified, Zachary took some time to reconnoitre the ground he was to go upon, before he ventured to advance a step. Having thrown himself back in his easy chair, and held a short council with his wits, he at length broke silence, and, with a gracious smile, began by reassuring Henry of his favour and support. "Heaven forbid," he said, "that one so beloved and protected by his friend should be reduc'd to labour for his livelihood; he bade him think no more of that, he wou'd take his fortunes on himself; and as he was determin'd not to let him sink from his former situation, the first thing he recommended him to do was, to equip himself with such necessaries as he had occasion for, ready made up from the warehouse at the neighbouring market town. Take somebody with you," says he, "(either Ezekiel or the old woman) to shew you the proper shop, and rig yourself out in gentleman's apparel; then let

me see you, and what you have laid out from your fund I will replace. As to my house, it is your own, if you chuse to make use of it; if not, and you prefer remaining where you are, we can easily make it up to the good people, who give you shelter; and I must candidly confess you will be more likely to find quiet and content in your cottage than under this roof with a certain person that shall be nameless."

Scarce were these words out of his mouth, when a violent noise from the chamber of Jemima put a stop to all further conversation. The sound was like the crash of glass, and it was followed by a loud and shrill scream, which conveyed to Zachary's ears the well known accent of his beloved's voice in its highest and most discordant key. "Bless us!" cried he; and starting from his chair, made his way as nimbly as he could to his consort's apartment, followed by Henry: upon opening the door the fragments of a glass bottle lay scattered on the floor, sprinkled with a liquor which saluted his nostrils with the veritable odour of Nantz: in another quarter of the chamber, Ezekiel Daw was discovered with a wash-hand bason in his hand, the former contents

of which he had sent back to their proper owner, who, though drench'd with the polluted stream, was foaming with rage, and preparing herself for another onset.
As both parties were high in wrath and strong in vociferation, it was not easy to collect any thing more of the fracas, than that the glass bottle had been vollied by the fair hand of Jemima at the scull of the apostle, and he, with happier aim, had bestowed upon her the miscellaneous contents of the bason. There was little doubt that the controversy had been of the religious sort, though not conducted with all the temper disputants on such a subject should preserve. The lady was evidently full of the spirit, and Ezekiel's zeal, though not quickened by the same flames, was certainly not of the lukewarm sort. He had been officious in preparing her for the other world, and she had done her best to send him thither before her. Jemima contended for election and grace, which she backed with the argument of the brandy bottle launched at his head; Ezekiel preached regeneration, repentance, and a new life, which he illustrated with the inference of the wash-hand bason. Had Jemima's syllogism not missed its consequence, it would

undoubtedly have been of that class, which certain logicians denominate the knock-down argument. Ezekiel's was applied ad verecundiam; rhetoric of a milder species, yet not less efficacious, having reduced his opponent to a situation, in which any reasonable person would have blushed at being seen.
The only way to make peace was to part the combatants, and this was done by Henry, who took his friend Ezekiel under the arm, and by force, rather than persuasion, conducted him off the field of battle. The eyes of Jemima caught a glimpse of him, whilst engaged in this office, and that one glimpse tended more to allay her rage, than all the sedatives, which Zachary's art could have administered; but this it effected by a revolution rather than a reform; for whilst it calmed one storm, it raised another: she now grew mawdlin, and began to whine and whimper in a piteous sort; the old woman was summoned to provide a change of clothes, and Zachary, glad to devolve his attentions upon Bridget, made a courteous exit, and retired to his chamber.
Jemima in the mean time proceeded in the task of repairing the damages, which her person

and apparel had incurred in her contest with the preacher, muttering revenge between whiles, and meditating projects for another interview with the youth, whose appearance had encouraged her with hopes that he might yet be won to continue in her service; and as no means seemed so likely to decoy him as a reconciliation with Susan, she determined within herself instantly to start a negotiation for that purpose.


CHAPTER VI. Is any Merry? Let him sing Psalms.
WHILST Henry walked slowly homewards with his friend Ezekiel, he was fain to lend a patient ear to an entire recapitulation of the learned controversy, which had, like most other controversies of the sort, exasperated both parties, and convinced neither. The good man had now the whole argument to himself, and managed it after his own liking, without interruption, branching it out into so many digressions, and commenting upon it as he went on so diffusively, that it may well be

doubted if his companion was one whit the wiser, especially as his thoughts were pre-engaged by the events that had passed in his conference with the Doctor. Ezekiel's new-birth, though strongly insisted on by him as the one thing needful in Jemima's desperate state of health and morals, did not at that moment interest Henry quite so much as the new scene of things, which now seemed opening upon him with more auspicious hopes than he had hitherto ventured to indulge. Nothing struck Ezekiel with such surprize, (as he frequently remarked to Henry) nothing seemed to him so unnatural in the behaviour of Jemima, as that she should be offended with him for an act of kindness, "to which," added he, "I protest unto you, I was mov'd by no other consideration than that of rendering her all the service in my power; for, having heard that Mr. Kinloch had pronounc'd upon her case, I came in pure charity and good will to apprise her that she had not many days to live, and for this my friendly office the ungrateful hussey treated me as you saw; but some natures are not sensible of any kindness you can shew them."

When they arrived at the cottage, Dame

May and Susan had spread the board with clean linen, and a homely, but comfortable, meal, and welcomed them with a smile, that would have recommended worse fare. Ezekiel, who had the hospitality, though not the purse, of a bishop, gave a nod of approbation to the women, and a hearty greeting to his companion. He then drew himself up to an erect posture, and, with much solemnity, began a grace, that would have served for the dinner of a cardinal, and which held his messmates by the ears long enough to cool the meat and tantalize their hunger: a polite preacher might have dispatched a modern sermon in the time Ezekiel took to warn his hearers how they indulged their fleshly appetites; which exhortation he had no sooner finished, than he cried out, "Fall to, my good friends, with a hearty stomach, and much good may it do you!"—an inference not exactly corresponding with the doctrine of the text, but probably better stomached by the hearers than any part of it, and more readily obeyed.
When hunger was appeased, and the fragments set by, Ezekiel, turning to his guest, said, "Methinks, friend Henry, thy countenance bespeaketh a cheerful heart; and verily

it gladdens me to behold it; for the face of an honest man is the index of his thoughts. The maiden also, who sitteth beside thee, seemeth to participate in thy good spirits, which is to me a sure token that I have not bestowed labour in vain upon her; for whereas the eye of the lover is sullen and sad, her's on the contrary is bright and joyous: our good dame also is merry, and in sooth so am I; for I experience something at my heart, which augurs better days: not that I complain of time past in my own particular; Heaven forbid! I am thankful for my lot, and contented therewith. It is not the rich man's gold that is to be envied; it is his opportunity of doing good therewith that I covet; to cheer the widow's heart, to cherish the helpless orphan, to employ the labouring poor, succour them in sickness, and wipe away the tear from the cheek of the mourner, these are the voluptuous enjoyments, these the real luxuries of life, which the great may revel in; this is their bed of down, their feast of dainties, and their flow of pleasure. But do they not too often let these joys escape them? Alas, I fear they do! They give, indeed, but do they bless withal? They scatter to the importunate and undeserving

bounties that would give life to the industrious, and people a whole neighbourhood. Oh, Henry! if ever thou art favour'd with the gifts of fortune, forget not, I conjure thee, that thou wast once the poorest of the poor."


"Behold, I am the favourite of fortune," cried the youth, putting his purse on the table, "and no longer poorest of the poor, therefore hear me at this moment declare, that never in any future period of my life, whilst I am possess'd of memory, will I fail to bear in mind the sad degree of helpless penury in which this unsolicited bounty found me, and least of all will I forget your goodness to me, my generous friends, your charitable protection in the hour of trial; and see! here are the means to add some comforts to this beloved circle, and yet provide me with all I am in want of."


"What!" exclaim'd Ezekiel, "shall we do good to our fellow creatures and be paid for it by filthy lucre? Shall we serve two masters at a time, praise God with our lips, and worship Mammon in our hearts? Perish all such double-minded hypocrisy! be far from me such pharisaical eye-service! No, young man, the master I serve is able to recompence me, and him only will I worship."


He now began to tune his voice to thanksgiving, and gave out Mr. Addison's beautiful hymn:—

When all thy mercies, O my God,
My rising soul surveys.—

The chorus was now full, for both Henry and Susan here could bear a part, as the words were familiar to them; and had not honest Daw and the Dame, in their zeal, effectually drowned the more melodious voices of the younger choristers, the concert would have been more tuneable than it was; but Ezekiel roared with might and main, and the old woman blew the trumpet through her nose with such a twang, that the cottage echoed with the din, and to add to the crash, the cow-boy, who was then in the act of driving the parish herd from their common, hearing the chorus, put the horn to his mouth, and stopping directly before the cottage window, sent forth such a determined blast, in malicious unison with Goody May's nose, as had well nigh overthrown the gravity of Henry and Susan, in spite of all their respect for Ezekiel, and the pious task they were employed upon: very different was the effect it took with him, for no sooner had he

wound off his cadence with the accompaniment of the said cow-horn, than he sallied from his castle, and angrily demanded of the lad what he meant by winding his horn in such a manner under his window, purposely to disturb and ridicule him in his devotions.
The lad, who was brother to that John Jenkins, whom Ezekiel had taken to task at the Justice's, stared at him with a contemptuous grin, and gave no answer. "Dost thou laugh in my face," cried Ezekiel, "thou unsanctified cub? I know thee, Joe Jenkins, I know thee well, and all thy kin, for a generation of scorners: fie on thee, reprobate! fie on thee!"—he was proceeding, when the saucy rogue, without any apology, slily put the horn again to his mouth, and turning it towards the orator, gave him such another dolorous blast in his ear, as drove him back into the cottage, almost deafened with the twang. What was to be done? The preacher was too much a man of peace to chastise him with his fist, and as for his tongue, loud though it was, it made no battle against the horn and the horn-master, who by long practice had acquired the art of giving such a tone to it,

as nothing but the patient ears of a cow could submit to be tortured with.
Here some of my readers may remark, that Henry ought to have turned out in support of his friend; but they will be pleased to recollect, in extenuation of his omission, that he had sufficiently smarted for his fray with the miller; that the stocks were in his sight, as well as his remembrance; and that he was at this very time so disabled with a sprained ankle, that he could as soon have caught the birds of the air, as the nimble-heeled musician: if none of these reasons will suffice to exculpate him, I have none else to offer, except that he was just now engaged in a conversation with Susan, which though conveyed by the eyes, in a language not altogether so sonorous as the horn, was not less intelligible, and probably more interesting to both parties, than what was passing without doors: in short, there was an interchange of looks, which Goody May either did not understand, or understanding did not see occasion to interrupt.
It cannot be disguised, that Susan May had thoughts in her head that did not entirely square with those self-denying maxims, which Ezekiel Daw had piously laboured to impress

upon her: she had the advantage both of years and experience over the youth, upon whose heart she seemed to level her attack: three years of her life she had passed in the school of Mrs. Cawdle, who was herself no mean proficient in the arts of intrigue; and though she had now renounced that service, it may well be doubted, if there were not other motives for her making this sacrifice, than purely the moral merit of the act itself. Of her passion for Henry she had given unequivocal proofs, not only in her interview with him, which Weevil and his party broke up, but in that also, which Ezekiel interrupted. With a person uncommonly attractive, she had a heart peculiarly susceptible; and when she repulsed the attack of Justice Blachford, it was probably more the result of an utter dislike of his person, than of any fixt and constitutional abhorrence of his proposals. Such was her superiority over every girl of the village in point of charms, that not one amongst them could retain her sweetheart, if Susan's eye once glanced encouragement upon him; but this she seldom condescended to, and then only in the way of a little sly revenge for their spite and malice against her; real liking she

bestowed on none; their clownishness, and her ambition, rendered her inexorable to all such suitors; but to the graces of Henry's person she had nothing to oppose; there was a traitor in the fortress of honour, that had he been disposed to have summoned it, would have been found a very busy agent for a surrender.
Hence it came to pass, that Ezekiel Daw had no sooner bolted from his castle to reprimand the obstreporous musician, whose accompaniment had so annoyed him in his psalmody, than Susan May availed herself of the lucky interval to glance a look at her beloved Henry, that plainly spoke the disposition she was in to profit by such an opportunity, and the good will she bore to the cow-boy for supplying her with the present one, however short: it fairly told him, that if Ezekiel had not so critically interposed to rescue her from his arms on a late occasion, she could have found in her heart to have forgiven him, and would have met the consequences without accusing her ill fortune. Mirth and good cheer had warmed the heart of Henry; the chilling blasts of poverty were for the present dispersed; Susan's eyes were too plain-spoken for him to miss their meaning, and his spirits

too much exhilarated to be totally insensible to the purport of it. Ezekiel, however, soon returned, and the scene was changed.
When the affair of the cow-boy and his horn had had its proper share of discussion, the party began to talk over the business of providing Henry with the necessaries he was to purchase; and it was determined to go the next morning to the neighbouring market town, which being upon the coast, and a port for small vessels, was furnished with all such articles as he was in want of, ready made: the distance did not exceed two miles, and Henry was of opinion he could walk thither in the present condition of his ankle, by the help of a stout stick, which stood in the corner of the room, and was in fact the pastoral staff of the itinerant apostle Ezekiel, who also offered to accompany him, and render him his farther help by the way. Susan, it may be supposed, was not backward in her tenders, and having been in the practice of making frequent purchases for Mrs. Cawdle at a certain shop of all sorts in the aforesaid place, was a party by no means to be left out of the expedition. The order of march was therefore finally so arranged, that Susan, under guard

of Ezekiel and Henry, should set out with the first of the morning, leaving Dame May in charge of the cottage, and also to provide the meal that was to cheer them on their return.
A council was next held for lodging the company, male and female; and whereas their barracks were not quite so roomy as might be wished, it was not without some arguing pro and con, that it was at last settled, that the mother and daughter should occupy the bed in which Henry had reposed himself the night before; that Ezekiel should keep his own quarters in the cockloft to himself alone; and that a certain couch, which presented itself as a succedaneum ready for service, in Dame May's chamber, should be brought into the common room, and, with the help of a mattrass, converted into a crib bed, for the sole use and behoof of Henry their guest.
These regulations made and agreed to, the parties drew themselves together in a circle round the hearth, where a few embers served to light Ezekiel's pipe, whilst the Dame took her knitting and Susan her needle, when a conversation ensued, which shall be recorded in the next chapter.



CHAPTER VII. Our Hero gratifies the Curiosity of his Host.

"METHINKS," cried Ezekiel, taking the pipe from his mouth, "there is a time, friend Henry, when honest men shou'd understand each other, and throw aside concealment: now I do not think thou canst charge me with an importunate curiosity in thy particular, having been content to know thee by none other name, than what thy sponsors gave thee at thy baptism, ever since thou refusedst to plead to the question of the Justice. Thou wilt say, peradventure, that charity maketh no conditions; that the good Samaritan needed not to enquire the name of him, who had fallen amongst thieves; and true it is, that I did not thereupon shut my bowels of compassion against thee, because thou didst withhold an answer to the magistrate's demand; yet having now consorted with thee at bed and board, and lived with thee as it were with mine own familiar friend, it seemeth meet no longer to disguise from us thy name and history, seeing that we may either do thee less

or more than justice, by our vague conjectures, for whilst we are in darkness we are liable to stumble."


"True," replied the youth, "your conclusions are just, are your friendship gives you a right to know all of me that I know of myself; yet can I give you little better satisfaction than I gave to the Justice, though I shall not content myself with the same short answer as I made to him. The obscurity, which involves my birth, is a secret impenetrable to me; and as I know not what name I have a right to take, I do not venture upon any. If I have a parent yet living, whose eye can trace me to my present poor condition, there may still be hope of it's amendment, for I have not always been thus lost and neglected; at all events it will behove me so to act in this my humble and reduced condition, that the reasons, which obtain for the obscurity I am kept in, may not owe their continuance to my misconduct and disgrace; so shall it be to their shame only, who conceal my birth, and not to mine, if it is never revealed in any future time."


"Aye," cried Ezekiel, "and it will be to their everlasting condemnation in the life to

come; for how can they expect to be receiv'd into the lot of the righteous, who abandon their offspring, and professing themselves to be rational creatures, responsible to their Creator, neglect those natural duties, which even the brutes instinctively fulfil? We will grant what seemeth probable to be the case, that thou art what is vulgarly called base-begotten; what then? the baseness is not thine, but their's who so begot thee. Is this a reason, that to the crime of bringing thee into the world unlawfully, they shou'd add that of abandoning thee unmercifully? Woe, treble woe to all such sinful monsters!—But proceed, for thy narration is interesting."


"That I appear to you," said Henry, "at present in the light of a deserted being, I cannot wonder; but rather suspect it is owing to the fatal accident that deprived me of support by the sudden death of my protector, than to any absolute dereliction of me by my unknown parents, if I have any such now living. The excellent person who educated and maintain'd me from my infancy, was a clergyman, moderately beneficed, and I never heard that he had any other means than his church-preferment; I must believe therefore that he was

secretly furnish'd for the purpose, else indeed I shou'd have been a burthen greater than he cou'd have borne, for I was carefully and indulgently brought up in the abundance of every thing that cou'd contribute to my comfort and improvement. If he knew the secret of my birth, he kept it faithfully, for he never open'd the slightest hint of it to me; and as his death was instantaneous, by a fall from his horse, all communication through his channel was shut upon me at once; and having neither right, means, nor inclination to keep my station in a house, that with my benefactor's decease devolv'd upon a successor, I threw myself upon the world too hastily perhaps in point of prudence, for certainly till that period I never knew misfortune. Upon the whole, I join with you in believing that I am illegitimate."


"Yes, verily," answered the preacher, "thou wert born in sin, for the world is full of fornication and all manner of uncleanness a the age is gross and carnal; the sons and the daughters of Belial revel in the face of the sun: in vain doth the preacher cry out to the strangers and pilgrims upon earth to abstain, they stop their ears; he crieth in vain; they

will not listen to his voice, preach he never so wisely. For my part, I am hoarse with preaching to this adulterous generation; my tongue cleaveth to the roof of my mouth with crying out to the daughters of the land to possess their vessels in sanctification, but in vain; though I warn them late and early, they heed me not; my whole flock is gone astray, every hedge witnesseth to their dishonour; the damsels are like the kids of the goats in coupling time, the young men like fed horses in the morning, every one neighing after his neighbour's wife, whilst I, if a wake or a fair or the sound of the pipe calls them off, though in the midst of a sermon, am left by myself like a lodge in a garden of cucumbers."

Henry smiled; Susan looked archly under his eyelids. Ezekiel, good man, had strayed away from the topic they were upon in the true spirit of digression, but having at length come back to the track, after a few whiffs for the benefit of recollection, he demanded of Henry, if he had rightly understood him, that the person who had taken charge of him, was a clergyman of the church of England?—Henry informed him that he was a clergyman

of the established church, and one that was an ornament to his profession; an admirable preacher, a deep scholar and a sound divine.—"Humph!" quoth Ezekiel.—"A man," continued Henry, "of exemplary morals, unblemish'd honour and a heart as gentle as the dew of heaven."—Ezekiel applied to his pipe with double diligence, and was envelop'd with a cloud of smoke.—"Whilst he liv'd I knew no sorrow; I had no other teacher; he was at once my preceptor, friend, and father."—"I believe it," said Ezekiel.—"He was such a friend as perhaps no father now discover'd cou'd replace."—"None such, I dare say, will be discover'd," replied Ezekiel: "Are thine eyes darken'd? Dost thou not at once discern that thou art Ishmael, the son of the bond-woman, and like him cast out into the wilderness, to seek thy fortune, without portion or inheritance?"—"You speak by allusion," said Henry, "and I may not rightly interpret your meaning; but if you suppose that I am the natural son of that exemplary divine, you do me too much honour, and him great injustice; therefore banish all those suspicions from your mind at once, and though I cannot expect you to reverence his character

as I do who knew it, I do expect that you will not wound my feelings by suggestions so unworthy of it. Don't let me appear gaptious by what I now say, but the respect which my experience of his virtues has engrafted on my heart, will not suffer any stain to be cast upon his memory; to him I owe the sense and conviction, of this and every other principle of rectitude and justice; and if I deviate from it, the transgression will lie at my own door: but I trust I shall not so offend against his instructions, as to grieve his departed spirit; and as I have endur'd adversity with tolerable resignation and composure, I hope, if it shall please Heaven to reverse my lot, I shall not be found wholly undeserving of prosperity."

Ezekiel knocked the ashes out of his pipe, and sate silent in profound meditation—Susan sighed and kept her eyes fixt upon her work,—Goody May went on with her knitting, observing however by the way, that a mother who neglected her own offspring was worse than an infidel. At length Ezekiel, awaking from his reverie, remarked, that he had somewhere read, or else been told, of a certain son in the like mysterious circumstances, who had either married his own mother, or had a child

by her, he could not exactly say which, but he remember'd it was a very shocking story.—"Whichever it was," Henry replied, "it wou'd not be his case; there was one sure way to escape shipwreck, by never going to sea." Here Susan glanced a look at him, which seemed to say, Make no rash resolutions.—Goody May in her natural manner said, "Well, well! I can vouch for it you are not my son."—"Nor any body's relation in this company, I dare say," added Susan.—Ezekiel next, with much gravity, put in his protest against the possibility of any claim being made upon him, for reasons which he should keep to himself; and concluded by saying, "He did not doubt but the sin laid at the door of some high-born hussey, for he believ'd from his heart there were many dark doings amongst them; few of them he fear'd were like good Lady Crowbery; she was a non-such, a pattern of purity."—This led him into another digression, in which he took a circuit round the neighbourhood, which set him down at the next door with Justice Blachford, who, he observed, was keen in spying out small trespasses in others, and overlooking great ones in himself.


"Aye, so the people say," cried Goody May; "but who believes them? Did not they scandalize my poor dear child, no longer ago than yesterday, when Henry was before his worship? I am sure, if I thought any harm of Mr. Blachford in that way, I shou'd not have listen'd to the offer he made me this very morning for my Susan; yet such a place as Mrs. Locket's, the housekeeper, for a young woman out of service as she is, does not fall to every body's lot: I am certain the late gentlewoman made a pretty penny by it, aye! and went as handsomely the whilst as the best she in the county."


"Went as handsomely!" repeated Ezekiel; "what dost thou infer from that, good dame, but that servants dress out of character, and shew the world they either spend more than they earn, or earn more than their wages?"

A conversation was now started between the Doctor and the Dame, which branched out into many discussions not very edifying, were I to attempt the relation of them, in all which the hero of our history had little interest, and took no part: Susan indeed could have told a tale of Justice Blachford, that

might have ended the debate at once, but she was in the first place under promise of secrecy, and in the next not in the humour to unfold it before the company present.
Upon the whole it was plain, that although Ezekiel mingled much good reason with many oddities, yet the worldly advantages of a gainful place, and the soothing measures Blachford had taken to insure an interest with the mother of Susan, had their due influence with her, notwithstanding all that the hazard of the situation, or the sincerity of honest Daw, could object to deter her.


CHAPTER VIII. Love and Ambition are no Friends to Sleep.
THE day was now closing, and twilight faintly served to usher the several parties to their repose; the couch was spread in the kitchen for Henry, in which task the fair hands of Susan had the principal share; and Ezekiel ascended to his loft.
All, who have experienced the effects of love

or ambition, will acknowledge that neither of these passions are endued with any soporific qualities: whilst Susan's thoughts were kept awake by one, her mother's imagination was haunted by the other: the image of Henry stretcht upon his pallet in all the captivating bloom of youthful beauty formed a glowing vision in the busy fancy of that fond damsel, which banished sleep: whilst the warm imagination of the fond mother pictured her beloved daughter in the state and dignity of housekeeper to Squire Blachford, with all the insignia of her office about her; the keys at her side, pickles and preserves, presses filled with linen, and stores of all sorts in her charge, with humble housemaids waiting to obey her nod—and rest was no less banished from her eyes. Each party being thus possessed by her ruling passion, they proceeded to vent their meditations in a kind of dialogue, or rather of alternate soliloquy, in which both exclusively indulged their own favourite ideas, yet neither perceived that she was talking to herself.

"Well, to be sure," cried Susan, "some people in the world must be absolutely void of feeling; they must be monsters in nature, who

abandon their own child: in my opinion, be they what they may, they might be proud to acknowledge such a son as Henry."


"Very true," quoth the mother; "and the more I think of it the more I am convinc'd, notwithstanding all that Mr. Daw can say to the contrary, that it will be the wisest thing you can do to close with the Squire's proposal. Why, lack-a-day! such offers don't come every day."


"Search the kingdom through," continued Susan, "you shall not see a finer, shapelier, lovelier figure in ten thousand, nor one that, in spite of his poor apparel, has more the air of a gentleman."


"I dare say," resumed the Dame, "that what with perquisites and presents, and such like fair comings-in, you will make it worth you a good twenty pounds a year, aye belike, and more than twenty; why, 'tis a fortune, girl; and he said he would not haggle with you about wages."


"I'll bet a wager, when he is dress'd in his new cloathes to-morrow, there will not be so charming a fellow in this county, nor the next to it. Oh! mother, let preacher Daw talk till

he is hoarse, he shall never talk me out of my senses."


"No, to be sure, girl, you are of an age to carve for yourself; besides, what can he know of these matters?"


"Nothing," replied Susan, "nothing in nature; you heard him say he had reasons of his own why Henry cou'd not be his son: O' my conscience! I believe him, poor man; those reasons of his are soon guess'd at: he knows no more about it than this bed-post; nay, not so much, for how shou'd he come at it?"


"Lack-a-day!" resumed the dame, "he is a goodly pious creature; but he forgets that young women have their fortunes to make."


"Aye, and their pleasures to pursue," added Susan, "though, with his good-will, they shou'd do nothing but sing psalms and hear sermons; if he had his way, he wou'd be for locking us all up like nuns in a cloister."


"Well, well then, follow your own fancy, and don't heed what he says to prevent it."


"That's my good mother," quoth the happy girl, nimbly turning herself about; "i'faith I'll follow your advice, and not regard what

he says to the contrary. A fine piece of work he made forsooth about nothing, only because the dear lad gave me a civil kiss, and ho harm done!"


"I told him there was no harm," rejoined the Dame, "I told him he was too strait-lac'd in those matters; and I dare say, if the Squire offers at any such liberties, your own discretion will take care no harm shall follow it; one wou'd not lose a friend for such little freedoms, so long as they are innocent ones."


"The Squire, indeed!" cried Susan; "name him not, filthy creature, I abhor and detest him, and had rather a toad shou'd touch me than he; but Henry—"


"What has got in your head now?" replied the mother, somewhat peevishly; "I am talking to you of Squire Blachford, and you are rambling about Henry: I am recommending a good place to you, and your thoughts run a gadding after the lad in the next room. Ah! Susan, Susan! thou wilt always be a gill-flirt, hankering and hankering for everlasting after the young fellows, but don't forget the main chance, my girl; remember service is no inheritance; make hay, as the saying is, while

the sun shines, and don't let a good thing go by you."


"It may be a good thing in one sense," said Susan, "but there is a very bad thing belonging to it. I know the Squire full well, and for what base purposes he makes this offer: he wou'd have me be to him as Mrs. Locket was, whom he's tir'd of, but I scorn it; I wou'd sooner beg my bread round the world with Henry than ride in my coach with such a nasty, black, old, heartless wretch as the Squire. Ah! mother, mother, all his kindness to you is but coaxing and cajoling to make a fool of you, and something else of me. If you had but seen what he did yesterday."—"Why, what did he do?" eagerly exclaim'd the mother, "you frighten me out of my wits."—"'Twas well I frighten'd him out of his," replied Susan, "by screaming and struggling, and forcing him to let me loose, or I know not what wou'd have happen'd; but I got out of his clutches, and made him let Henry out of the stocks, or I wou'd have expos'd him to the whole neighbourhood. But now, mother, don't say a word of what I've told you, for I gave him my promise I wou'd not tell of it; nor wou'd I have open'd my lips, if you had not

press'd me about his offer, which I am sure you wou'd not now wish me to accept."


"Not for the wealth of the world, my child," replied the good Dame, "wou'd I have you take a service on such terms. Well, of a certain that man must have the cunning of the devil in him, for he talk'd to me in such a stile, that I no longer believ'd any one of the bad stories that are told of him, but took them all to be mere spite and malice; and when Mr. Daw talk'd against him a while ago, I took his part, and was angry with the good man for listening to such fables: Alack-a-day! what a world is this we live in!"

Dame May had now got into the moralizing vein, the lulling quality of which soon began to take effect; her words died away in drowsy murmurs, the visions of ambition faded from her sight, and the gentle god of sleep no longer needed solicitation to befriend his aged votary after the accustomed sort.
Half of his task was still unfinished; the bright eyes of Susan were not so willing to be closed, nor could he still the throbbing of a young high-passioned heart, which panted for other consolation than his soft quiet could bestow.

The wanderings of fancy were not so easily allayed, and projects upon projects rose in succession to puzzle and perplex her brain: but even meditation and the thoughts of love will yield at last to Nature's kind restorer, balmy sleep; and though, perhaps, there were other arms in which she would more gladly have reposed herself, the love-sick damsel fell at length into the embrace of that delusive power, which has nothing to bestow but dreams and visions and unreal shades.


CHAPTER IX. A domestic Scene in upper Life.
LET us now steal away with silent tread on tiptoe from the pallet of the sleeping damsel, to visit the more splendid but less peaceful chamber of the Lady Crowbery.
Upon her return from Zachary's, she crept up to her room, hoping there to pass a few undisturbed moments of private meditation, for her heart was full, and her thoughts unsettled; in spite of the letter she had lately heard read

to her, she could not divest herself of the first impression which the sight of Henry had made upon her heart. In his features she persisted to believe that she had recognized the picture, which memory had preserved of her child, matured but not obliterated by time; and the longer her mind pondered upon it, the stronger her persuasion grew, though against probability, that she had discovered her son in the person of this mysterious stranger. His name, age, form, nay his very voice, struck her ear as conveying the same tones, only deepened by manhood; in short she surrendered herself to this idea, which, like a spell, possessed her senses, and dissolved her into tears.
At this moment a message from her Lord summoned her to his presence: unseasonable though it was, she well knew no excuses for delay would be allowed, and she instantly obeyed. She found him with Blachford and two other persons, the one an attorney who managed his estate, and the other a captain of marines, who bore his name, and was acknowledged as a near relation. Bloated by the flattery of these his constant sattelites, and secluded from the rest of the world, his pride, self-consequence and ill-humour were without

controul; and as nothing met his eye of which he was not the lord and master, he was become the despotic tyrant of the sphere in which he moved. Blachford found it convenient to court his favour, for his property extended far and wide over the neighbourhood; and such interest as is attached to property he could not fail to possess, and did not scruple to exert. Blachford's small estate was surrounded by his lands and manors; the countenance of Lord Crowbery was also the more to be coveted, because he lived upon very distant terms with every other gentleman in the neighbourhood. He had been giving the Peer an account of Henry, and the several circumstances that had come out at his examination. In telling a story he had an art of shaping it to his purposes, and on these occasions any one might have supposed him to be upon the best terms with truth, so free did he make with it. He spoke of his prisoner's behaviour as highly insolent and contumacious, and though of necessity he had released him upon Weevil's evidence, yet he still considered him as a suspicious character; he observed, that it was not impossible but the whole might have been an artful collusion between him and Bowsey; and though the

law would not bear him out in committing him to prison, it was no rule to him in matters of opinion, and as far as that went, he for one could not bring his mind to acquit him of the guilt.
Whilst Henry and Ezekiel were upon their visit to Zachary, Blachford had been with Goody May upon the subject of the housekeeper's place, and by her he was told of Lady Crowbery's coming to her house, and of the bounty she had bestowed upon Henry. This he now good-naturedly imparted to my Lord, not willing that any of her good deeds should be lost, extolling her charity, but doubting as to the worthiness of the object it was employed upon. Appearances, he confessed, were apt to mislead, and in no case more likely so to do than in that of the young man in question, who, he must say, was one of the handsomest fellows he ever set his eyes on, and it was very natural on that account to feel a prejudice in his favour; he owned that he himself had experienced it whilst he had him under examination; and if he, being a man, was sensible of it towards one of his own sex, it was not to be wondered at if the softer heart of a woman was affected by it in the same, or even a greater degree.

This was enough for all the spiteful purposes of Blachford; it was putting the match to the train of combustibles in the jealous bosom of the Peer; who muttering to himself something not quite distinct enough to be clearly over-heard by his company, rung the bell and dismissed a servant to his lady with the message already reported.
Upon her entering the room he received her with a kind of ironical civility, expressing his hope that she had had an agreeable airing: he next enquired where she had been? To the apothecary's—And to no other place? She recollected having stopped at the cottage of Goody May. And didn't she recollect any thing more than simply stopping at her door? Cou'dn't she recollect entering the cottage? Cou'dn't she call to mind her own good deeds there perform'd, and the very generous method she took of chearing the widow's heart, by letting her see how bountiful she could be to a stranger and a vagabond at the very first sight? The fame of her charity, he said, had circulated through the whole village, and their demands upon her in future could not fail to be very high; for what was there which the resident and industrious poor might not reasonably expect

from one, who had so much to throw away upon the idle and undeserving?—Her answer was very short. She was always sorry when her little charities were made matter of report; but she perceived she had some friend, (and here she pointed a look at Blachford) who was not disposed to let her slightest actions pass unnoticed. She had indeed given a small matter to the young man, who had been apprehended upon a false charge; and from the circumstances, which then appeared, she thought herself warranted to consider him as an object deserving of her charity. "Nobody can doubt of your ladyship's motives," replied my Lord with a sneer; "and no object, if I am rightly inform'd, can be better qualified to stir up the soft sensations of charity in a female heart than the fellow in question. I find he has been pretty successful already in his setting out; but now that your ladyship has lent your hand to the good work, we may expect him to perform great matters; whilst you furnish him with money and encouragement, he'll supply himself with amusements amongst the wives and daughters of our peasantry, to the great improvement of the breed, being, I am told, as perfect an Adonis as was ever carted to the

gallows. One of our young parishioners, it seems, has been very charitable to him already, and left her service for his sake; I mean the daughter of that very woman, whom your ladyship honours with your visits, and who at present condescends to inhabit a cottage of Mr. Blachford's, in which however I am inclined to think her residence will not be of any very long duration, if my interest can obtain her removal; for my charity will not, like your ladyship's, be address'd to one worthless individual, but have respect to the community at large, by clearing it of this fellow and his clan, who are in a fair way, with your kind assistance, to corrupt the morals of the whole hamlet, if not speedily driven out of it."

To this no answer was attempted on the part of the lady; she well knew the quarter from which the spiteful information sprung, and she doubted not but this charge against Henry was equally groundless with all the rest: she was secretly resolved, however, to ascertain the truth, as far as it could be discovered in Susan May's particular; and now Blachford too late began to repent of his folly in stirring any question about that young woman's

conduct, who had so much in her power to retaliate upon him: he gnawed his lips with vexation for having been so flippant on a tender subject; but cunning fellows are very capable of outwitting themselves. The captain and the lawyer kept close; and whilst my Lord was meditating a fresh attack upon the patience of his lady, a servant announced the arrival of visitors, in the persons of Sir Roger Manstock and his daughter.
As our readers will have frequent opportunities of making their own observations on the character of this gentleman, and also of his fair companion, we shall in this place disclose no more of either, than that Sir Roger was a person of considerable weight and influence in the county, living hospitably, and cultivating the good esteem of his neighbours rich and poor. He had married a younger sister of Lady Crowbery's mother, and by her was left a widower with an only daughter, Isabella by name, who now accompanied him on his visit.
We have said that Lady Crowbery's father left his estate in trust for her use, and this trust he devolved upon Sir Roger Manstock, than whom he probably could no where have found a

fitter person, he being not only strictly faithful to her interest, but as tenderly regardful of her happiness as if she had been a child of his own. Nothing but this love and regard for her could probably have brought him to the house of the Lord Crowbery, whose society he disliked and whose tyranny he detested. He was now called over upon a matter of business; the news of Mr. Ratcliffe's death had reached him, and the bearer of that melancholy intelligence was himself a suitor to succeed him in the living. As Sir Roger well knew the great esteem Lady Crowbery had for the deceased, he did not think fit to broach his business in the hearing of my Lord or any of his companions; but having prefaced his request with a proper apology to that noble personage, he retired with his niece and daughter to another apartment, and there disclosed to her, with all the precaution in his power, the fatal accident that had befallen her friend, an event which, under any circumstances, would have been highly affecting, but in the present state of her spirits was peculiarly so, combined as it now was with her sensations in regard to Henry, her mind being instantly smitten with the conviction that he was her son. This incident,

though unknown to Sir Roger Manstock, produced effects that could not be disguised, and he perceived her agitated to such a degree, that he no longer thought of leaving her, as he at first intended, but very earnestly desired she would permit either himself or his daughter to stay by her for the evening, if Lord Crowbery would consent to give them house-room.
To this kind offer she thankfully acceded, saying, "You are always good to me, and considerate of my unhappy spirits; knowing how unpleasant a task I impose upon you, I ought not to be so selfish as to accept your kindness; but I do confess the society of my dear Isabella, if you can spare her to me one day, will be a comfort above every thing in life; but if you grant me this, you must add the further favour to it, and speak to my Lord, for I dare not undertake it." She then asked some slight questions respecting the person who brought the intelligence, and this she did for the purpose of introducing an enquiry more interesting—"Did he know what had become of the young man, whom Mr. Ratcliffe had adopted?" The Baronet replied, "That this had been one of the first things in his thoughts,

knowing as he did the affection which the deceased entertained for that young man, but that he could learn nothing more from his enquiries concerning him, except that he had suddenly disappeared after the decease of his friend, and had not since been heard of.
This was a circumstance that seemed to her to carry conviction with it, and she no longer doubted having discovered her son in the person of Henry. It was now in her power to secure to him the protection of Sir Roger Manstock, without revealing the more important secret of his birth, to which no one was privy but Doctor Zachary; she determined therefore to communicate to him the several occurrences that had been passing in the village relative to Henry, and concluded by saying, "It will be a very singular turn of fortune, or I should rather say of Providence, if it proves that I have discover'd this very foundling by the merest accident in nature, and that he is now in this parish, at the house of a poor widow, where I chanc'd upon, him this morning, in a state of absolute distress and indigence: shou'd he prove to be the relict of my lamented friend, I will take his future fortunes upon myself, and in this undertaking I

hope I shall have your approbation and advice, for I am sorry to say I foresee great uneasiness from a certain quarter, somebody having taken the cruel pains to impress my Lord with very unjust prejudices against him already; and to confess the truth, at the moment when you and Isabella arrived, I was under strong rebuke for having bestow'd a small relief upon him, which that mischief-making Blachford had reported after his fashion, and in the art of aggravation I am sorry to say he is exceeded by no one."

Our readers will now be pleased to help us to the conclusion of this chapter, by kindly supposing that every thing proper to be said on the part of the worthy Baronet was said; that having taken leave of my Lord, and by his gracious permission left the lovely Isabella to administer soft consolation to her unhappy cousin, he is safely seated in his post-chaise on his return to Manstock Castle, having ten miles to measure homewards, and the evening fast approaching to it's close.



CHAPTER X. Our Hero is seen in a very dangerous Situation.
THE sun had now rear'd his glittering orb above the eastern waves, gilding their curled heads with orient gold, when Susan, eager to prepare for the appointed expedition, broke from the bands of sleep, and unfolding to the god of day two brilliant eyes, whose lustre seemed almost to vie with his, silently detached herself from the side of her still snoring mother—for she, sweet nymph, disdained the selfish practice of those unfeeling and obstreperous beings, who seem to think, when they have done with sleep, that all the world should wake: on the contrary with steps as light as gossamour, she trode slipperless over the clay-bound floor, and throwing a loose bed-gown over her, fastening it at the same time with a slight knot round her waist, presented to the sylphs, if any were there attending, an object for which they would doubtless have been content to have taken human forms, though they had forfeited immortality by the exchange.

Thus half attired, she raised the wooden latch, that was the only barrier betwixt her and the beloved youth, who occupied the solitary couch in the adjoining room, not entering like the nightly thief, with a malicious intent to steal upon his defenceless slumbers, and plunder him undiscovered, but for the harmless purpose of redeeming her own property, there deposited and left at his mercy, of which she recollected various articles, that had escaped her memory over-night, and which of course it now behoved her to reclaim. She drew the chamber-door after her with duteous attention, still cautious how she disturbed her aged parent in the enjoyment of her repose, and for a time, as if fascinated by the charms of the slumbering youth, stood in fixt contemplation of his person, seeming to have lost all memory of those very objects, which she came in search of. Two or three loose articles, not very essential to her dress, she had already collected, when casting her eyes upon the couch, she discovered the skirt of a snow-white quilted petticoat, which she had improvidently spread upon the very pallet, on which his limbs were stretched, and which certainly could not be recovered, without

wakening the sleeping youth, then bodily extended upon it.
In this case what alternative remained? It was clear to the dullest apprehension, that a young woman without a petticoat could not decently present herself to the eyes of a whole market-town, where she was soon to appear: yet it could not be taken from under him by the most delicate address without wakening him, and at the same time he could not be awakened and made to open his eyes, without discovering how much undrest she was, and how very thin the veil, that scarcely intercepted the entire display of those natural charms, that seemed to set at nought the slight defences, which in her present dilemma she had been necessitated to entrust them to.
Native modesty and a ready wit suggested to Susan the only middle way she could pursue, in the straits, to which she was reduced: Henry himself was cloathed, if the jacket and trowsers heretofore described, may be termed a cloathing; there was no need, therefore, for any guard upon her eyes, and she no sooner wakened him by tugging at the petticoat underneath him, than apologizing in a gentle whisper for the necessity she was under of

disturbing him, she concluded by modestly requesting him to shut his eyes, for that positively she was naked, having nothing to throw over her but her gown.
Whether it is in nature for a young man to shut his eyes, when a lovely girl apprises him of the consequences of holding them open, I leave as a problem for the philosophers to resolve; and as I suspect they must, in the spirit of their school, decree for shutting out all prospect of an object, so calculated to disturb their systems, as Susan now presented, it is with sorrow I am reduced to confess, that our hero did the very contrary to what they would have done, setting open his eyes upon the damsel, and fixing them with the broadest stare, betwixt sleeping and waking, that their lids would admit of. Whether he was then dreaming with his eyes open, and thought it the vision of some nymph or goddess, such as young and fertile imaginations are apt to feign, where no substance is, I cannot decide; but this I know, that had he been a painter, such as I could name, he had made the form immortal, and us who beheld it heathens and idolaters.
Susan was too generous to repeat the cruel

injunction she had before laid him under, but on the contrary, having once told him what he ought to do, left him to take the consequences of not doing as she advised. Sagacious and deeply intuitive men often tell us, that there are certain things, obscure indeed to common beholders, which they can see with half an eye: this I presume is a figurative way of speaking, peculiar to these human lynxes; but without a figure I should be temped to say, that any man who had even less than half an eye, would have strained hard for a glimpse of those charms, which burst upon Henry's sight in full display. The wrapping-gown was either so scantily provided, or so ill disposed to do it's office of concealment, that if form so beautiful could be indebted to any covering, Susan's form had very little obligation to the aforesaid reluctant wrapper. Some readers may naturally suppose, that either the severity of Susan's countenance over-awed the curiosity of the youth, or that the modest confusion it expressed, pleaded for his forbearance so irresistibly, as not to be withstood by any but a brutal nature: had it been so, Henry's task had been easy and his temptation light; but, truth to tell, both were aggravated by

every alluring action, every winning smile that love and beauty could assume. Here the philosopher, whose stoic apathy had turned aside from the sight, may affect to triumph in his wisdom, but it is now time to let him know, and learn by the example of this heroic youth, that true virtue, indignant of such mean resources, boldly dares to look upon the danger, which temptation plants before it; that, scorning to shelter itself like a coward in the dark, and shut it's eyes or even wink upon the foe, it prays for light like Ajax, that it may see to conquer, and enjoy the glory of a combat fairly won: so fared it with our hero; he boldly eyed the Syren coast, which he had resolution to avoid. Perhaps some natural wishes stole upon his heart, his pulse perhaps no longer temperately beat, and rebel passion mutinied within him; but he was master of his soul, and mildly addressing himself to the alluring damsel, conjured her to return to her apartment, nor conspire with opportunity and strong desire to degrade him into a villain, and make him loathsome to himself for ever.
The commanding tone of determined virtue is not to be resisted. The fair one blushed, looked wishfully upon him; she saw no change

or shifting in his countenance; she hung her head, sighed, despaired, and obeyed: yet before she took the parting step, she paused, looked back, and turning a countenance upon him, beautiful though in anger, firmly pronounced,—"We meet no more."

The tone in which these words were uttered, the look that accompanied them, the cutting recollection of his obligations to her for the generous pity she had shewn him in his past distresses, these and a flood of tender passions burst so suddenly upon him, that springing from his couch (which at the same time broke under him with a horrid crash) he cried out to her to stop, and ran to take her in his arms. She had the door in her hand, and immediately the voice of Goody May was heard, crying out—"Villain, wou'd you violate my daughter?"—These dreadful words struct the ever-open ear of Ezekiel, now descending the stairs, who instantly annexing conviction to the charge of the mother, added another spectre to the groupe, standing speechless and aghast, with a huge woollen night-cap on his head, and his breeches in his hand.
The tears, the terror, the dishevelled habit of Susan, seemed to warrant the suspicion of

no worse a deed, than the mother had announced. Ezekiel's lips quivered with rage, whilst he demanded, in a voice almost inarticulate, an account of what had passed; vowing that the violator of innocence should answer with his life. Henry now stept forward, and directing a stern look first on the mother of Susan, and next on the preacher, delivered himself as follows;"—

"Are you mad, to treat me in this manner, to accuse me of these crimes, to suspect me for a hypocrite, a defiler and a villain? Is it ever to be my fate to be arraigned of actions, which my soul abhors? Was it not enough to be apprehended for the murder of a man, in whose defence I risqued my life? Must I also be thought guilty of violating that chastity, which I would die in the protection of? If you conclude me subject to be tempted by beauty, can you not suppose that I am capable of being awed by innocence? Look at this form, he must be a monster that defiled it; survey these charms, they wou'd wither, they wou'd be blasted, and no longer have the power to engage and please, were they stain'd with dishonour and divested of modesty. By how much the more lovely they are now, in

their pure and virgin state, so much the more revolting they wou'd become, if they had lost the grace of virtue, and degenerated from that chastity, to which they owe their sweetness and attraction. I am a stranger to you both, it is true; I am a stranger to myself; and all the little that I know of this unhappy self, I have imparted to you: what then? I am a man, I am your fellow-creature, I have like you a heart, that feels and has a sense of honour, justice and gratitude. You have been kind and bountiful and hospitable to me; this amiable, this generous girl was my first, my best, my warmest friend: the indignity that I suffer'd she deliver'd me from; the service that I quitted, she voluntarily renounc'd; in my poverty and despair she tender'd me her all, the earnings of her labour she wou'd have shar'd with me—with me, an unknown, outcast, miserable being: Are these bounties to be repaid by seduction? Are they not rather charities, affections, pledges to be treasur'd in my heart? They are; I cherish them with equal love, with equal ardour and affection; and I declare to truth, that were I now a man, that had a name and station in society—but as I am, I only can conjure her, for her own repose,

to banish me and my sad story from her thoughts for ever. To invite her to misery I scorn; to seduce her into guilt, if it were in my power, which I trust it is not, I abhor; but to suppose me capable of the diabolical crime of violating her.—Oh! horrible!—It chills my very soul; I shudder at the thought."

This speech wrought an immediate and entire conversion in the minds of those, whom appearances had staggered, and shame for her hasty exclamation smote the heart of the good dame so forcibly, that she seemed to think she could never do enough to atone for her injurious suspicion. She declared she should henceforward ever repose such perfect confidence in Henry's honour, as nothing should induce to harbour a thought to the contrary; that, so far from being afraid to trust her daughter in his company, she should, on the contrary, be happy that her girl had such a friend to protect and advise her; and she sincerely hoped what he had now been saying (which in her opinion, and she dare say in Mr. Daw's also, was very proper and very fine) would have it's due weight with Susan, and make her more guarded in her conduct for the future.

Ezekiel, during this harangue, had stept aside to equip himself with certain appendages to the person, which to man in a civilized state have by custom long established been held as indispensable. Susan in the mean time made her defence, which briefly consisted in an explanation of the errand which had brought her into the room where Henry slept; she was not in perfect humour with her mother for the glance she had given at her unguarded conduct, and with some small trace of contempt in the look she dealt to Henry, observed, that for all that ever had passed, or was ever likely to pass, between Henry and her, she needed neither reproof nor warning; she believed she was not more safe with her mother than with him.
Ezekiel now made his appearance; his head was still mounted with it's woollen tiara, which resembling certain sketches I have seen of his holiness the Pope's triple crown, gave a loftiness and dignity to his figure, of itself naturally erect and stiff, that had a striking effect upon his air and attitude; whilst he predicated as follows,—"Thou hast well spoken, good and virtuous young man, as the spirit that worketh in thee to edification hath given

utterance, and verily I pronounce that the seed, which the sower of all grace and godliness hath sowed in thine heart, falleth upon good ground, and beareth fruit abundantly. What thou hast said of a chaste and modest seeming in virgins, set apart unto sanctification, I the rather commend thee for, seeing thou hast touched it lightly and humbly as becometh a novice, inexpert as thou must needs be in the ministering of such prudent exhortations and reproofs, as men older and more experienced than thyself are fittest to apply, and which I shall take prompt and speedy occasion of so doing. And now I will stay you all no longer, for the morning advanceth, and the occupations of the day demand that I shou'd conclude, seeing that it is in part devoted to the service of this our friend and inmate, for whose better equipment we have undertaken to provide; and thou, Susan, as I now for the first time perceive, art almost, if not altogether, unprepared for the expedition, being as it shou'd seem in thine outward adornments very little removed from a state of nature."

The parties now separated; the women to their chamber, Ezekiel to his loft, whilst Henry

was left to his meditations, not a little pleased that the preacher had so unexpectedly cut short his exhortation.


CHAPTER XI. Our Hero engages in an Expedition where he is exposed to fresh Dangers.
FEW victories have cost more pains in the earning than this which Henry had now gained over himself and the tempting allurements of his fair assailant. Being now at leisure to pursue his meditations, he seated himself in Ezekiel's wicker chair, like a Roman conqueror in his triumphal car, from whence he could proudly look down upon the rebel passions, reduced from formidable foes to vanquished slaves, and prostrate at his feet. Still he was sensible it behoved him to secure their allegiance by strong measures of coercion; for whilst he was fortifying his spirit against future temptations, Susan was arming her person with all the artillery that her simple, but not inelegant, toilette could supply.

Few that make dress a science could have hit that happy stile of nymph-like character which her unstudied taste had struck upon, instinctively contriving to give every natural grace its fairest form and fashion: in short, when perfectly accoutred, she was a champion in the lists of love to make the firmest heart tremble at the sight of her; and though, in deference to Ezekiel's judgment, I must except Potiphar's wife, yet, setting her apart, I should doubt if Susan had any other superior upon record for a coup-de-main. Malicious fortune was all the while laying other traps and pit-falls for the persecuted virtue of our youthful hero, and the pious preacher himself was unintentionally drawn in to be an accessary in the plot; for having avowed his design of edifying his hearers with a dehortatory discourse against love and the indulgence of the passions on the next Lord's Day, he had accidentally recollected that Saturday had stolen a march upon his memory, and that he was now upon the very eve of that important undertaking: in the mean time the more he ruminated upon the wide field of matter into which his subject would carry him, the more work he found cut

out for his hands, and the more preparation on his part necessary. He was aware he should have an audience to deal with not over-well disposed towards edification on this particular topic, and rather hard of hearing at the best: he had kept a sort of flying camp about the enemy's quarters, and frequently beat them up in small skirmishes without much success to boast of; they still lay entrenched in their fastnesses, lurking about in ambush behind walls and hedges, where they made battle, in spite of all he could do to dislodge them; he determined therefore to draw out all his strength for this one decisive stroke, and finally rout them out of their hiding-places.
Now this state of mental preparation appeared to him, upon reflection, so totally incompatible with his expedition to the slop-shop, and the inferences of coats, waistcoats, shirts and breeches thereunto appertaining seemed so ill to class and coincide with the hostile measures he was actually concerting against the aforesaid coats, waistcoats, shirts and breeches, that he plainly saw both things could not be done at once, and which to abandon gave him little hesitation to decide: he

therefore came down to Henry, peremptorily protesting against the slop-shop and all which it contained. Goody May had the province of the kitchen purveyance under her care, and the pot to plead for her excuse: Susan had neither those culinary concerns in charge as her mother had, nor, like Ezekiel, any hostilities in meditation against love and the passions, with whom, on the contrary, she was in perfect league and combination; she was therefore no natural ally for Daw's purpose, and not wanted by her mother.
The alternative therefore was simply this, either Henry must go alone, or tête-à-tête with Susan. Now what could Henry do by himself in a slop-shop? As far as coat, waistcoat and breeches went he might, peradventure, fit them on better without Susan's helping hand than with it; that part of his business he might get through passably well, but in the linen-trade he was an arrant ignoramus, and the damsel a consummate adept; she knew to the breadth of a nail what was measure for a shirt, and the quality she was no less perfect in;—he knew as much of the matter and no more, than the king of Pelew, (Heaven bless

him!) whose wardrobe will not fill a nutshell. Of course, therefore, Susan must go, or nothing can be done; there is no choice in the case; and where is the mighty objection all the while? The walk is not long; the day is fine and fair, and Susan is ready dressed for the expedition: Henry, alas! was but a shabby 'squire in point of apparel, but that was a fault which would be remedied before he came back, and nature had given him perfections which poverty could not disguise.—So forth they went together.
I hope my readers will not urge with any critical asperity an objection to this jaunt of Henry's on the score of his sprained ankle; if we are to suppose him recovered from it, cures no less extraordinary have been as rapidly performed in histories of this sort, and I lay claim to all the privileges which my fraternity enjoy; but I had rather have it understood that his good-will to the walk with Susan was so great, that, notwithstanding his cure was incomplete, he was determined, in the vulgar way of speaking, to put his best foot foremost, and trust to fortune for the consequences.
There were two roads to the town, one

public and familiar to Henry, having travelled it with his master Zachary, when he got the drenching at the mill; the other private, shady and sequestered, though somewhat circuitous: which of these to take was now the question. Love and Susan seemed to point to the crooked path; prudence and dispatch prescribed the strait one. The candid damsel fairly owned that her way would be the farthest about, but then it would be pleasanter whilst they were upon it: she put him in mind of his sprained ankle, yet she hoped he felt no pain in it at present, her mother's recipe never failed of a cure: she observed that the sun threatened to be hot, and she did not disguise that she was shy of over-heating herself. Now how should prudence in the sunshine stand any chance against Susan in the shade? A penny-post-man, nay even pedestrian Powell himself, though in the last mile of his foot-match, would have taken the very path that Henry did, and readily have preferred the farthest way about to the shortest way home.
They soon found themselves entangled in a narrow defile between two hazel-hedges; when Susan, pausing on her steps, and glancing an arch look on her companion, said, "I cannot

not for the life of me conceive, Henry, what you was thinking of this morning, when you was so eager to get me out of your room: o' my conscience, you was in such a twitter to be rid of me, that I began to think I should have been obliged to have left my petticoat behind me."


"Had you so done," cried Henry, smiling, "I can only say you wou'd have been more formidable to all beholders without a petticoat than with one."—"Not to such beholders as you are, I should guess," replied Susan, "in any case."


"Well, then," resumed he, "to be more sincere with you, I did think myself bound in prudence not to hold you any longer in discourse till you had got that same petticoat on, and every thing else about you that cou'd keep us both out of danger."


"Oh! now I understand you," she replied; "you was afraid my mother wou'd come in, and that I shou'd be in trouble on your account. Lord love you! there was nothing to fear."—"Pardon me," answered Henry, "there were your temptations and my weakness to fear."


"I don't rightly comprehend what danger you was in from either," resumed Susan, "unless

you hold with Ezekiel's opinion, that it is a sin to love."—"I am not quite convinc'd," said he, "that there is any sin in love, but I am very sure that love may lead to sin."


"Yes, yes," cried she, "I agree with you that it is very sinful and treacherous in any man to pretend love to a young woman, and after he has made a fool of her to expose and betray her; that's very scandalous behaviour, without a doubt. So is it an abominable thing for any man, like that nasty Blachford, to set his wits to work and lay traps for poor girls to bribe them to his wicked purposes, when he knows they must hate such a black, old, ugly fright as he is, and only do it for the lucre of gain. I know enough of his wicked ways; such a man as he is does not deserve to live: but where two free hearts meet together in mutual fondness, and where there is no bribery or false dealing in the case, but all is fair and open, and good faith kept on both sides, I should be surpriz'd indeed if you or any man cou'd persuade me to think that there was either sin or shame in such young people's loving each other; and if they do love truly and sincerely, I desire to know in that case what they are to do?"—"Marry," said Henry;

"that is what they ought in honour to do, or do nothing."—"Well to be sure," rejoined Susan, "that is one way; but suppose it does not suit them to marry, suppose it's impossible; what's to be done then?"—"Nothing," replied Henry with a smile; "I've answer'd that already."


"Heyday!" cried the gallant damsel, "that's a curious doctrine indeed, a fine way truly of returning evil for good. I shou'd hate and despise the man that treated me in that manner; I shou'd regard him as the poorest wretch that walks the earth."—"Why then we'll talk no more upon the subject," cried Henry, "but, like friendly disputants, kiss and make it up."—"'Tis more than you deserve," answered me; "for though I must confess you are a dear good soul, yet you have the oddest notions of any mortal breathing; and as for love, you know no more about it than Ezekiel Daw."—"Instruct me then," quoth Henry, "for love, like dancing, is an art that grown gentlemen may be taught by an apt professor, by a very expeditious process."

Pleasant companions make journies appear short, and probably these young travellers found themselves at the end of their's, before

they were tired of each other, or of the way. In the shop, which was a magazine of all sorts, Henry fitted himself with a mourning suit of the best materials, not forgetting that mark of respect, to the memory of his deceased friend Mr. Ratcliffe: It sate so neatly upon his person, that it seemed as if some lucky taylor, in a moment of inspiration, had projected it for an ideal model of the most perfect symmetry and proportion. Susan was not idle in her department meanwhile, and as the last hand of the artist had been put to every thing, the whole man was equipt from heel to head in a few minutes, as completely as if he had started ready caparisoned out of the earth, like the troops of Cadmus.
Our hero now felt himself once more restored to that appearance in society, which he had ever been accustomed to, till misfortune, and the villainy of mankind, had reduced him to the weeds of poverty: he was therefore moving in his proper sphere and character, and not strutting like a lacquey in his master's cloathes. This did not escape the notice of Susan, and her sagacity immediately discerned that natural and easy air, which no upstart can counterfeit, the unalienable inheritance of a

gentleman: she now paraded over the marketplace, not a little proud of her companion, and would not be put by from carrying him to her uncle the tonsor, who entertained them in his house with much hospitality, no lack of good cheer, and plentiful store of chatter.
When all accounts were settled with the vender of slops, and the packages put into safe hands for conveyance to the village, Henry and his fair charge having refreshed themselves with a beverage, which the tonsor had himself manufactured from the produce of his bee-hives, they took leave of their host and turned their faces homewards, by the same way they had come, the sun being now rising apace towards his meridian.
A form like Henry's cou'd not be quite concealed by the frock of a peasant, yet it was doubtless set off to much greater advantage in the dress of a gentleman, and Susan's eyes witnessed the pleasure she took in contemplating the change now made in his appearance. It also gave a flow to his spirits and a freedom to his air, which gratified the gaiety of her nature, and made him more companionable and pleasant by the way. Their discourse was

lively; her railleries were not gravely answered as before, nor her playful coqueteries so coldly overlooked: a thousand little dalliances took place, a thousand harmless knaveries interchangeably passed, as they sauntered through the shade; and kisses were sometimes snatched, sometimes evaded with a'coyness so arch and so alluring, as was better calculated to heighten her attractions, than to check his advances. She had plucked a wreath of blossoms from the hedges, which she wove about her hat; he decked her bosom with violets and wild flowers fancifully disposed, which he was now permitted to arrange, now prohibited, as the whim prevailed. Sometimes she would stop, expostulate, turn back, or run aside into the allies of the wood, and pretend to hide herself amongst the branches; this was a challenge for a pursuit, and that never failed to be rewarded by some endearing favour, won with struggles that enhanced it's value.
Their walk concluded, Susan parted to the cottage, and Henry turned his steps to the house of Zachary, whose portico, embellished with a rich sky-blue scroll supported by two

gilded gallipots, informed the way-faring man and the world at large, that there the mischances of human life might be relieved—for there dwelt "Zachary Cawdle, Surgeon, Apothecary, and Man-Midwife."



END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

VOL. II.

Ficta voluptatis causâ sint proxima veris,
Nec quodcunque volet poscat sibi fabula credi.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR CHARLES DILLY, IN THE POULTRY. 1795.



CONTENTS.

BOOK THE FOURTH.
CHAP. I. The Author appeals to his Readers Page 1
CHAP. II. Chamber Dialogues of different Sorts Page 8
CHAP. III. Nature will have her Way Page 18
CHAP. IV. Nothing so furious as a Woman scorned Page 27
CHAP. V. Miscellaneous Matters Page 40
CHAP. VI. A figurative Stile is apt to puzzle a plain Understanding Page 53
CHAP. VII. The Events of this Life are chequered with Good and Evil Page 59
CHAP. VIII. How deep and secret are the Seeds of Love Page 69
CHAP. IX. A funeral Oration out of Place Page 78
CHAP. X. The trampled Worm will turn Page 85
CHAP. XI. A Blow well placed in the Dark, or, in other Words, according to the Greek Proverb, Blachford shears a Lion Page 96


BOOK THE FIFTH
CHAP. I. A short Treatise upon Love, antient and modern Page 103
CHAP. II. A Letter spares a Blush Page 109
CHAP. III. Some Folks are no nice Discerners of Times and Seasons Page 112
CHAP. IV. A new Scene opens upon our Hero Page 121
CHAP. V. The Coward out of Doors is a Lion in his own House Page 134
CHAP. VI. Danger approaches, and the Doctor is dismissed Page 143

CHAP. VII. Shews how some People pass their Time in the Country Page 155
CHAP. VIII. He is the true Hero, that can conquer himself Page 170
CHAP. IX. It now becomes doubtful, if a certain Hero is any Hero at all Page 179
CHAP. X. Symptoms of falling in Love Page 188
CHAP. XI. An angry Altercation with a Person unknown leads our Hero into imminent Danger Page 201


BOOK THE SIXTH.
CHAP. I. The Author hints at a Reform in the Constitution of a Novel Page 209
CHAP. II. A terrible Encounter, in which our Hero is totally discomfited Page 218
CHAP. III. Our Hero is led towards a Discovery highly interesting Page 225
CHAP. IV. County Politics debated over a Bottle Page 235
CHAP. V. Fresh Mischief in Meditation against our Hero Page 245
CHAP. VI. Love is a subtle Arguer Page 259
CHAP. VII. The Hero of our History is brought to Shame Page 268
CHAP. VIII. A Visitor appears at Manstock House, who brings Intelligence of an unexpected Sort Page 277
CHAP. IX. Bold Measures boldly avowed Page 293
CHAP. X. More bad Tidings for our degraded Hero Page 303
CHAP. XI. A Death-bed Dialogue, in which some Readers will think there is much Folly, others much Honour, on the Part of our Hero Page 314





HENRY.

BOOK THE FOURTH.

CHAPTER I. The Author appeals to his Readers.
I SHALL now put in a few words, whilst my history pauses, touching what I claim from my readers, as a right, and what I hope and expect from them, as a favour.
My claim is briefly this, credit in all cases for an honest meaning, or in other words, the best sense that a doubtful passage will bear: it is thus I have treated others, the same treatment I have a right now to claim from them.
On the score of favour I am their suitor in the humblest sense, for I see so many imperfections starting up in my performance, which I cannot cure, and suspect there may be so many more, which possibly I shall not discover, that I have no notion of sending my sins into the world without one apology; I am not hardy enough to give in the account between my readers and myself, without the usual salvo of errors

excepted.—"Take Nature for your guide," says the critic; "follow her and you can't go wrong." True, most sagacious critic, I reply; but what is so difficult? Does the tragic poet always find her out? Does the comic writer never miss her haunts? Yet they profess to paint from nature, and no doubt they do their best: the outline may be true, but the least slip in filling it up mars the portrait; it demands a steady hand, a faithful eye, a watchful judgment, to make the likeness perfect; and grant it perfect, the author's work will gain no praise, unless it be pleasing also; for who opens a novel but in the expectation of being amused by it?

"Let it be merry," says one, "for I love to laugh."—"Let it be pathetic," says a second, "for I have no objection to the melancholy tale that makes me weep;"—"Let your characters be strongly marked," cries a third, "your fable well imagined, and work it up with a variety of new and striking incidents, for I like to have my attention kept alive."—These and a hundred more are the demands, which one poor brain is to satisfy in a work of fancy; wit, humour, character, invention, genius, are to be set to work together, fiction is to be combined with probability,

novelty with nature, ridicule with good-humour, passion with morality, and pain with pleasure; every thing is to be natural, yet nothing common; animating, but not inflammatory; interesting, but not incredible; in short, there must be every thing that judgment can plan and genius execute, to make the composition perfect: no man has done all this, and he, who has done most towards it, has still fallen very short of the whole.
With all this consciousness about me, I yet do not despair but that the candid reader will find something in this fable to overbalance its miscarriages. I shall proceed as one, who knows his danger, but is not discouraged from his duty. These children of my fancy, whom I have brought into existence, I shall treat as they deserve, dealing out their portions of honour and dishonour as their conduct seems to call for it; and though some amongst them will probably persist in acting an evil part to the last, yet collectively they will leave no evil lesson behind them.
As to our hero, if he has been so fortunate as to gain an interest in the good opinion of the reader in this period of his history, I am bold to hope he will not forfeit it in the succeeding

occurrences of his life, but that he shall preserve a consistent character to the end; that so, when his part is finished, be it happy or unhappy, he may earn a plaudit as the curtain drops.
I do not aim to draw a perfect character, for after a pretty long acquaintance with mankind I have never met with any one example of the sort: how then shall I describe what I have not seen? On the contrary, if I wish to form a character, like this of Henry, in which virtue predominates, or like that of Blachford, where the opposite qualities prevail, I have nature before me in both cases: but if in the former instance I will not suffer a single shade to fall upon my canvas, and in the latter do not let one tint of light appear, what do I present to the spectator, but a confused and shapeless mass, here too glaring, and there too opaque, to preserve any outline that can give to view the form and fashion of a man?—The brightest side of human nature is not without a spot, the darkest side is not without a spark.
For my own part, as I am not apt to be amused with stories told to the discredit of mankind, I should be sorry if this of mine appeared to any of my readers to have that

tendency in the general. A contrast of character there will be in all histories, true or feigned; but when an author is the biographer of men and women of his own making, he has it in his power, without losing sight of nature, to let the prevailing impression of his fable be favourable or unfavourable, and indulge his own propensities to a certain degree, which ever way they point. Now I know not why we should studiously put forward none but the worst features of the time we live in; yet I think this has been done by some novelists of great celebrity, in whom there reigns a spirit of satire, that in my opinion neither adds to their merit nor our amusement. A pedant, who secludes himself from society, may nourish a cynical humour; but a writer, who gives the living manners of the age, is supposed to live amongst men, and write from the crowd rather than the closet; now if such a man runs about from place to place with no cleanlier purpose than to search for filth and ordure, I conceive his office to be that of a scavenger rather than a scholar. An honest man, as I take it, will always find honesty enough, and a friendly man meet friendship enough in his contemporaries, to keep him in

good-humour with them. Something indeed may be found to reprehend in all times; as the manners and the morals fluctuate, the mirror that reflects them faithfully will give to objects as they pass their proper form and feature. In the time I am now writing, the national character shews itself in so bright a point of view, that the author must be harsh in the extreme, who holds up fictions of depravity as exemplars of the aera in which he lives.
I think I may promise myself, therefore, that the general spirit of my history will not be thought morose. I have, indeed, taken occasion, in the character of Jemima Cawdle, to make free with enthusiasm; but I have at the same time exhibited it in contact with a virtuous principle, under the auspices of my worthy friend Ezekiel Daw: I have described a domestic tyrant in the person of Lord Crowbery; but I did not give him a title because I thought that pride was attached to a peerage, or that the cruel and overbearing part which my fable assigns to him, was characteristic of nobility, the very contrary of which I hold for doctrine; neither did I locate Blachford in Jamaica, as favouring an invective against our countrymen in the West Indies; no man, I

believe, can be found less inclined to be a convert to that groundless prejudice, which vain and shallow heads have been hatching for purposes no less fatal to the interests of the public than to the reputations of individuals.
To represent scenes of familiar life in an elegant and interesting manner, is one of the most difficult tasks an author can take in hand; for of these every man is a critic: Nature is in the first place to be attended to, and probability is not to be lost sight of; but it must be nature strongly featured, and probability closely bordering on the marvellous; the one must touch upon extravagance, and the other be highly seasoned with adventures—for who will thank us for a dull and lifeless journal of insipid facts? Now every peculiarity of humour in the human character is a strain upon nature, and every surprizing incident is a degree of violence to probability: How far shall we go then for our reader's amusement, how soon shall we stop in consideration of ourselves? There is undoubtedly a land-mark in the fields of fancy, sunt certi denique fines, but it requires a nice discernment to find them out, and a cautious temper not to step beyond them.

Here, then, I will rest my cause, and conclude my chapter. My readers have my best endeavours to amuse them; I have devoted very many hours to the composition of these volumes, and I am beholden to them for beguiling me of many a care; if they retain their property when they shall pass into the hands of those who peruse them, it will be every thing I can hope for from them.


CHAPTER II. Chamber Dialogues of different Sorts.
WHEN our hero arrived at Zachary's castle, he found a post-chaise in waiting at the gate: As he passed it to enter the court, he made a profound reverence to a lady, whom at first sight he supposed to be his noble benefactress and the owner of it. Upon the glass being let down, to return his civility, he perceived his mistake: It was Isabella Manstock: She had accompanied her cousin in her morning airing, and was now filling up the time with a book, whilst her ladyship was in private conference with Doctor Cawdle. That lady had imparted so much of her business to Miss

Manstock as sufficed to inform her she was upon a very interesting discovery as to the identity of a young man who had belonged to her deceased friend Ratcliffe, and whom she expected to meet that morning at the Doctor's. Of Henry's adventure with the Miller, and what had passed in consequence of it, that young lady was fully apprised; the story had been told to Sir Roger in her hearing over night, and more circumstantially detailed by Lady Crowbery as she came with her in the chaise. When she saw, therefore, a young man in mourning, whose appearance answered to the description she had had of him, she was in no doubt of his being the person in question: Curiosity led her to survey him with some attention; and when she perceived him, after stopping for some little time at the gate, turn back without entering it, (for the sight of Lady Crowbery's equipage made him doubt of the propriety of his visit) she took courage to accost him, saying—"If your name is Henry, Sir, I believe you are expected within doors."—"That is my name, Madam," he replied very respectfully; "and I am much beholden to you;" upon this he turned back, and entered through the shop to the offices.

In the kitchen he was encountered by old Bridget, who, after daring at him for some time with astonishment, no sooner recognized his person, thus newly habited, than she began a string of questions, huddled together with so little order, and so much eagerness, that he fairly excused himself the trouble of replying to any one of them, by desiring she would let her master know that he attended his pleasure.—"Hold there!" cried Bridget, "master is engag'd."—"I know how he is engag'd," replied Henry, "but I fancy he will see me."—"Say you so?" quoth the hag, "then 'tis clear from what quarter your fortune comes: Ifackins! you're a rare one! Some folks have the luck of it, that's for certain: times are well chang'd with you, youngster, since you first enter'd these doors; no wonder you was in such haste to leave us; fine cloaths and an easy service suit you better than hard work and a coarse jacket!"—She then ran on with more of the like trash, with several sly glances at Lady Crowbery, till Henry again reminded her of going up to her master—"Well, well!" replied she, "have a little patience, my fine spark, and recollect it is not yet my place to go on

your errands at the word of command: though my lady has thought fit to dress you out like a gentleman, she has not hir'd me to be your messenger: However, I shall tell my master you are here. Sit down upon that bench; time was when you would have thank'd me for the offer: when you are call'd for I'll let you know."

Thus muttering to herself, she mounted the stairs; but instead of going into Zachary's room, went strait to her mistress, eager to broach the news she was charged with, and well prepared to set it off with every proper comment and illustration, suited to her own envious temper and the hearer's taste.

"Here's news to tell the King!" cried the hag, as she hobbled into Jemima's chamber: "As sure as you are in that place alive, Mistress, wou'd you think it? there's Harry, our errand-boy, now in the house, spruc'd out as fine as any lord in the land. If he was heir to the greatest squire in the county he cou'dn't be in handsomer mourning; spick and span new from top to toe, and all of the best!"—"What do you tell me?" exclaim'd Jemima, "how has all this happen'd?—"How has it happen'd!" repeated

Bridget; "why, as it always happens to such vapouring Jacks, by a smooth tongue and a handsome face; the poor and homely may go starve for some folks; young and personable beggars pick up all the charity: marry commend me to such charity, it may well be said to cover the multitude of sins! As if it cou'd be a question, how he came by his clothes, when there is a certain great lady close closetted with master, who is waiting to see him in all his glory, and I warrant you upon thorns till I tell her he is come; but I won't tell her, not I, at least till I have your orders for it I won't: for why? I am no servant of her's, I'm no putter-together of people that don't pay me for it: why should I skip of his errands? I wish to my heart, mistress, you cou'd only see with your own eyes how the lad is chang'd since he slipp'd his skin: Then he carries him in such a way; he is as vain as a peacock: I protest to you I did not know him when he stept into the kitchen: Sir, said I, with a curtesy, what is your pleasure? for I thought he was some fine gentleman that might have custom for my master.—Bridget! cries he, go up to your master, and tell him I am here.—Marry come up! my

dirty companion, quoth I, (for his tongue betray'd him, and by this time I had spied him out) who'll be the fool then? My master's employ'd with your betters. Let him be employ'd with whom he will, quoth he, I shall be welcome, so tell him what I bid you. With that I thought of the old proverb, "Set a beggar on horseback," and will'd him to reflect on what he was before he presum'd to send me on his messages: Yet I was minded to tell you what was going on, so I came nevertheless; and now, if you please, I will go back and let him know I'm not the person he takes me for, to fetch and carry at his command; for my part, I am out of all patience with such upstarts."


"Hold, Bridget," replied Jemima, "upon reflection I think it best you should let him come up; for 'tis clear to me from what point this wind blows; and though I don't approve of my house being made a house of assignation, yet by indulging them in this one meeting we may get to the bottom of the plot, if we can but contrive to overhear their cabal. So this is your fine charitable Lady Crowbery, whom every body is praising for her good works! rare works, o'my conscience! excellent

charity! that singles out the handsomest young fellow in the world for its object, and then thinks to throw dust in our eyes by pretending to befriend him out of pure pity and good will! Ah Bridget, Bridget! what a world is this we live in! How often have I preached to you upon the vanity of works! Let us have faith and grace, and it matters little what we do, or what we omit to do. For my part, I always suspect your charitable people; and as for her ladyship here at hand, 'tis pretty clear what complexion her charity is of: however, let her have her way for this turn, let her have-her swing of charity, and enjoy the fruits of her good works; but be sure to put your ear to the key-hole, and discover if you can what is going on, for all means are fair to bring to light the dark deeds of the wicked."

Whilst this was passing with Jemima and her maid, Lady Crowbery and the Doctor had been in close and earnest consultation on the subject of the discovery now so fully ascertained. When she had given way to those tender emotions, which Nature exacts from the sensibility of a parent under circumstances so critical, she rose from her chair, and having taken two or three turns across the room, as if for

recollection's sake and to compose her spirits, resumed her seat, and laying her hand upon the Doctor's arm, as he rested it on the elbow of his chair: "My good friend," she cried, "what shall I do in this perplexity? Dare I commit myself at once to the discretion of this young man, and trust him with the secret of his birth? Alas! I dare not make the discovery to him: the terror I should suffer, left the secret should escape him and reach my lord, would be insupportable; you know his temper too well not to see how compleatly ruined I should be in such an event: indeed I cannot even guess at the consequences; only this I am assured of, they would be most dreadful."


"Truly," replied Zachary, "I cannot advise your ladyship to such a step at present, although I think very highly of the young person's discretion, and can well believe how much you must wish to give a loose to those feelings so natural to a parent for an only child, and one so well-deserving of your love; but the suddenness of the discovery, and the agitations of a youthful spirit, taken by surprize in a matter of such consequence, might overpower his prudence for the moment, and

drive him upon a discovery of the secret without any intention of betraying it."


"'Tis exactly that which I stand in dread of," replied the lady; "you state the case correctly as I feel it, and those feelings, which I have never ventured to confide to any body but yourself, would be so hard to suppress, were the object of them here present, that I am almost afraid of indulging myself with an interview. Yet again, when I consider how long I have been in the practice of suppressing what I feel, I think I may risque the meeting. He is not entirely new to my sight, and if my spirits should be too much agitated by what passes, you will take measures for bringing me to my recollection, and preventing consequences that may be dangerous to us both; this you can pass off to the score of indisposition, and dismiss him when you see occasion: but if I can command myself so far as to enter into conversation with him naturally, and without hazarding too much, you will leave me to make my own way with him in such a manner, as may enable me to gain some insight into his character and understanding. As for his person, I told you how striking the impression was that it made upon me, not

only from its absolute but relative beauty, as bringing to my memory the very image of a father, who was, in my eyes at least, the model of perfection. Alas! the traces of that fatally-beloved form are too deeply imprinted on my heart ever to be effaced by time; and if it was a crime to love, and be undone by loving him too well, surely my sufferings have been such as fully to atone for my improvident offence. To purchase pardon of a father, I consented to his wishes by marrying Lord Crowbery: How dreadful was that sacrifice! I had no heart to bestow; that was gone with him, from whom I was separated as far as sea and land and obstacles insurmountable could divide us from each other, without a hope of ever meeting more on this side death. What has been his fate Heaven only knows! mine has been sorrowful enough, and what to other married women would be an irksome reflection, is to me my only consolation—I have never borne children to Lord Crowbery. At the same time, I am sensible how much this circumstance contributes to embitter our domestic peace, and aggravate that ill-humour, which my unwearied efforts cannot soothe. Alas! how should they? He is quick enough to discern that the attentions I pay him, and

the patience I exert, have no connection with the heart; that they are artificial virtues, become familiar by practice; and that I am indebted to indifference only for the facility with which I perform them. If then I am thus exposed to his ill-humour for acting the part of a dutiful and obedient wife without the affections of one, what would be my fate should he discover me to have imposed upon him in a matter more derogatory to his honour, and for which no plea or extenuation could avail me? I tremble at the reflection: wonder not, therefore, if my terrors prevail over the longings of a mother's heart, and compel me to use the language of caution, whilst my bosom glows with all the ardour of affection."

Whilst Lady Crowbery was thus discoursing, Henry had arrived, and being now announced by Bridget, order was given for his immediate admission.


CHAPTER III. Nature will have her Way.
HENRY now entered the room, dressed, as we have before observed, in mourning for his departed friend, and with all that modest

grace, which was natural to him, advanced a few steps from the door, and then stopt short, as one that waits in humble silence to be spoken to.
The Doctor was seated in his sick chair; the lady opposite to him and in full front of the interesting object that now stood before her: It was a trying moment; she glanced a look upon him that would have told him where to find a mother, had he met her eyes. All the advantages of person were now restored to him by change of dress; but there were other circumstances still more attractive, that made this second interview peculiarly impressive; what was at first pre-sentiment was now become a certainty; the consciousness that she was actually in presence of a new-discovered unacknowledged son, struck on her heart like an electric shock, as sudden and as swift. She started, shivered, and with difficulty refrained from crying out, as Nature prompted her, "My son, my son!" The very counterpart of that engaging form, that won her virgin heart, and triumphed over all restraints of duty and discretion, was in her eye; 'twas Delapoer himself restored to youth, or risen from the grave; the same fine symmetry of shape, the same rich glow of manly beauty,

that once so fatally had charmed her in the father, was here transfused into the son, and brought past scenes so full into review, as almost made them present.

"Henry," says she, "I find I have a claim in you, that by the death of Ratcliffe now devolves upon me in full right and title: the object of his care henceforth belongs to me, and therefore wonder not to see me thus affected by surprize and pity, having discovered you to be the relict of my much-lamented friend. Ah, my dear child, (so let me call you now) my tears shall mix with your's in watering the grave of that invaluable man."

Here her voice failed, her agitation became extreme, and a discharge of tears came seasonably to her relief. What portion of them appertained to the mother's share, what to the friend's, I leave for nature to decide. "And now, Henry," resumed she, "confiding in your discretion, I take you by the hand for life, pledging myself for your future fortune, and promising to stand by you in the place of a mother, till the mystery of your birth shall be revealed, and even of that I would not have you despair. I observe with pleasure you have put yourself into mourning for your friend, which is highly proper and commendable in

you; and as you must have exhausted your small supply, I shall provide for your occasions in such a manner as will enable you to support the character of a gentleman, in which you are so well qualified to move, and wherein I shall not cease to uphold you. The misfortunes you have encountered since your hasty departure from your patron's house, and the indignities you have suffered in this place, are now recompensed to you by the happy providence that has thrown you upon the protection of one whose arms, like those of a parent, are open to receive you. In what line of life to dispose of you must be matter of some reflection, and I shall advise with my uncle Manstock on the subject, who was, equally with myself, a very cordial friend to poor Ratcliffe. At the same time, my dear child, if you have formed any wishes, and have any predilection for one profession rather than another, let me be acquai
•…
d with them; remember only that it must; 
•
e the profession of a gentleman, and your connections in the mean while must be such only as are suitable to that character. The poor widow and honest Ezekiel, who have harboured you in your distress, shall be recompensed for their hospitality; but I should

think you may now accommodate yourself better, and perhaps it may be the more expedient for you to situate yourself elsewhere, as I understand that the daughter of dame May is now in the house with you, and you may well believe that people's tongues will not be idle upon that occasion: indeed I have already heard very strong aspersions cast upon that young woman and yourself, in the hearing of my Lord; but as they came from that malicious being Blachford, I gave little credit to what he said, not doubting but you will have too much consideration for yourself and me, as well as too much principle, to form any sort of connection with a girl like Susan May."

Here she cast a scrutinizing eye upon Henry, whose cheeks were crimson, conscious as he was of some certain sensations, which these admonitory words did not exactly accord with. He was however at no loss for terms the most proper and becoming to address Lady Crowbery in, neither did he omit to set her mind at ease with respect to Susan May. Of Blachford he spoke without reserve, reprobating the baseness of his attack upon an innocent character; and saying, that if there were any

evil designs in meditation against that poor girl, he was persuaded they were harboured only in his treacherous heart. He professed a wish of remaining a short time longer in his present quarters, as he feared it would carry the appearance of pride and ingratitude to the good people, who had so kindly entertained him, were he to turn his back upon them in so abrupt a manner. As to any preference for one profession or employ above another, he said he had been in no condition to indulge such ideas, or presume that it could in any case be referred to him as matter of choice; necessity had been his mistress, and in his late extremity he had seen no other prospect before him for earning a subsistence but by carrying a musket in the service of his king:—"There," added he, "I might have laboured usefully, or perished honourably; for private service I was little qualified, as my late kind master, now present, can witness; and perhaps I had besides some constitutional repugnancies, which do no credit to my humility, and are the consequences of an education given me by an indulgent patron, that filled my mind with higher notions than were suited to my fortune."—Then, raising his eyes, and directing a

look, animated with the tenderest expression of gratitude and devout affection to his amiable benefactress—"But you, Madam," said he, "have commanded me to entertain hopes more aspiring than I ever ventured to indulge in my happiest days. In what words can I express my thanks? I have no power to give them utterance. Pardon me, I beseech you, and pity my confusion: I would fain speak, but cannot; there is something at my heart, I know not what, too full, too vast, I cannot give it vent. Oh! my rever'd, my heaven-inspir'd protectress, whose condescending goodness deings to take upon yourself the tender office of a parent to me, a nameless creature, let me for this one moment feed upon the fond persuasion that I am your son, and kneeling at your feet, embracing them, and bathing them with tears of filial love and gratitude, pour out that flood which else would burst my heart."

The emotions which this energetic address raised in the maternal heart of Lady Crowbery, who saw her unacknowledged son now kneeling at her feet, were such as description cannot reach; she had thrown her arms about his neck, and was on the very instant point of declaring

herself to him, when at once a sudden crash stopt the words upon her lips; the door of the chamber burst inwards, and, sprawling with her face upon the floor and her heels in the air, behold the person of old Bridget! Instantly the lady gave a scream, and started from her chair; Henry nimbly recovered his legs, conscious that the posture he was in could not be too suddenly shifted; whilst Zachary roared out with astonishment, making several demands in the name of the devil; to which Bridget, either being, or affecting to be, stunned by her tumble, declined a reply, till being repeatedly urged by the authority aforesaid to give some account of herself, and not finding it convenient to give the true one, she pretended to have slipped down as she was passing hastily from her mistress's chamber, and falling with her whole weight against the door, burst it open: in the mean time Jemima's bell ringing a furious peal, Zachary bade her begone for a blundering old fool; which, as Henry had now set her on her feet, she thought fit to obey, and departed without more words.
In fact she had effected pretty nearly all the purposes of her commission, having spied out

enough to form a very sufficient report of the lady's good liking for Henry; and as she had seen her throw her arms about his neck, without hearing what passed between them on the occasion, it must be owned she had stronger circumstances in proof than commonly fall to the share of reporters in cases of the like nature.
From too great zeal to discover more than the small horizon of a key-hole was calculated to disclose, Bridget had pressed so incautiously upon the door, that the lock, which was none of the best, having treacherously given way, she fell as we have related headlong into the room, just in time to stop the telling of that secret, which was the most important that son could hear, or parent communicate.
Great was the uneasiness which this unlucky accident occasioned to Lady Crowbery; and it was not without some pains on the part of Zachary she was dissuaded from taking certain conciliatory measures with the old woman, for sealing her lips, on the presumption of her having seen more than was prudent to make public; but as he contended strongly for Bridget's incapacity of making observations, whilst

her face was on the floor, it was finally judged adviseable to let it pass in silence, and not create a danger by over-anxiety for preventing it. The alarm, however, had so disconcerted Lady Crowbery, that she had no resolution to renew the conference, much less to touch upon that interesting discovery she was on the point of making, when Bridget interrupted her; so that after a few words spent in recommending Henry to remain quiet and out of sight at the cottage, till he heard from her again, she hastened to her fair companion, who was waiting for her in the carriage, and departed.


CHAPTER IV. Nothing so furious as a Woman scorned.
IT may well be supposed that Bridget lost no time in making her mistress acquainted with the cause of the disturbance and noise, she had heard in the Doctor's chamber, and also of what she had there discovered: as she could give no account of their conversation, which was carried on in too low a key to reach her ears on the outside of the door, Jemima was left to her own imagination

for finding out motives for a lady's embracing a handsome young man, whilst he was kneeling at her feet, and these, according to Jemima's notions, could be but of one sort; she therefore set it down for certain in her own mind, that Lady Crowbery was desperately in love with Henry, that her house was made a house of assignation, and her husband pander to an intrigue of the most bare-faced nature.
These conclusions she had no sooner formed, than she discerned at a glance all the advantages they gave her in a certain project, which she had long meditated, without being able to bring it into any practicable shape. Henry, who seemed to have escaped out of her hands, was by this lucky circumstance more than ever at her mercy; and though she was sensibly piqued at the preference given to a rival very little her junior in age, and, in her own opinion at least, not at all her superior in charms, yet she was well pleased to be paid for her mortification, by having possession of a secret, the suppression of which no sacrifice on his part could be too great for, whilst there was such a person in being as Lord Crowbery; neither was she sorry to find that Henry's

scruples were not so general as she thought them, nor his virtue above price: the inference she drew from all this was, that the menace of a discovery so fatal to both parties, could not fail to draw him into her measures, as effectually as Lady Crowbery's money had bribed him into her's; and as delicacy was no part of Jemima's character, whose passions were as violent as her soul was mean, the heart of Henry was not her object; nor were any gratifications unacceptable to her, because not granted with good will, for pleasure was pleasure in her calculation of it, though it were extorted by terror, or gained by artifice and trick.
Her first care, therefore, was to bind Bridget to strict secrecy for the present, that so the parties, being under no alarm, might continue their meetings, till proofs of a more decisive nature might be obtained against them: her next solicitude was to procure an interview with Henry, and for this purpose she dispatched the old woman to way-lay him before he left the house. This succeeded to her wish, for he no sooner received her summons than he obeyed it, prompted, as we may presume, by desire to ascertain, from her conversation,

whether any reports had been made to her, that might affect Lady Crowbery.
Upon his presenting himself to Jemima, she received him with an air of joyful surprize, congratulating him on his good fortune, and praising Lady Crowbery to the skies for her charity: she assured him of the sincere pleasure she took in seeing him thus happily extricated out of all his trouble, and by the favour of his kind patroness rais'd to a situation, which so well became him; and as she was persuaded that his noble friend wou'd not fail to go through with the good work she had set her hand to, she cou'd not suppose that Goody May's cottage wou'd be any longer a fit residence for him, either on his own account or the lady's.—"Was it not better," she asked, "for him to abide where he was, where his good friend might see him as often as she thought fit, without drawing any body's eyes upon her, as she was in daily habits of consulting the Doctor, and of course her visits wou'd be pass'd to his account."

Upon Henry's observing that Lady Crowbery's actions required no cover, she quickly replied, that nobody held that lady's character in higher esteem than herself; that she knew

well enough she had nothing to fear on the score of reputation, if the world wou'd report nothing but truth; but as such fair dealing was not to be expected, especially in her case, who had so many evil-minded spies upon her, and so morose a husband to deal with, she must think that too great caution cou'd not be taken to provide against consequences—"For alas! poor lady," added she, "I am afraid, that with all her virtues and all her charities, she is scarce credited for the one by her jealous lord, and ill rewarded for the other by her thankless neighbours."

Jemima carried on this hypocrisy with so much address, that Henry began to think she was sincere, at least he was persuaded that nothing had been said to her by Bridget, and of course nothing seen. As to his continuance at the cottage, he saw it nearly in the same light with Jemima; Lady Crowbery herself had stated objections to it, and his own reflections suggested many more; what Jemima had observed with respect to the commodiousness of her own house was perfectly well founded, and as she betrayed no one symptom of her former propensity, but talked and looked with composure and sedateness, he was

half inclined to accept of her proposal. There were other thoughts, however, that crossed him in this determination, and they required further reflection. He saw all the danger of his situation with Lady Crowbery; the ardour with which she had clasped him in her arms was more than he could account for, and gave him serious alarm; gratitude had prompted him, in an unguarded moment, to throw himself on his knees at her feet; the emotion on his part was natural, and the source from which it sprung pure and respectful, but what could be the motive with a person of her delicacy and decorum for a mark of sensibility so extraordinary and unexpected? Charity he could well understand to be kind and condescending, but charity is not called upon to embrace, to caress the object it relieves. The act was an indication of something more than pity; it followed upon his claiming her protection as a parent, and it seemed to be inspired by all the tenderness and affection of the character she adopted: How was he to interpret it?
Whilst he was silently revolving these thoughts in his mind, Jemima's eyes were fixed upon him, and the same contemplation that

inspired her with hope, inspired her with desire: the colour rushed into her cheeks, her countenance underwent a change, that did not escape him—"Henry," she said, "I hope you are resolved to accept my invitation; I have every disposition to be your friend that you can wish me to have; I will serve you, assist you, accommodate you in all points and purposes, and be as secret as your own thoughts: with my friendship your fortune is made, without it you are ruin'd, lost and undone."

Henry stared at her with surprize; he saw the storm gathering, but knew not where it would burst; nor could rightly divine what either her promises or her menaces alluded to: he desired her to explain herself.
She paused for recollection, and seemed hesitating whether to proceed or to retract: probably it was her wish that she had not precipitated herself into this dilemma, till matters had been riper for her purpose, but she had already gone too far to avail herself of a retreat; it was too late, the die was cast, and she must stand to the throw. "Well then," she cried, "since you do not, or will not, understand me, sit down, and I

will, as you desire, explain myself to you without reserve. To prove to you therefore in a word how sincerely I mean to deal with you, I shall begin by confessing to you honestly and freely that I love you: Nay, do not start from me, nor meditate an escape, for accordingly as you treat my secret I will treat your's; therefore I must be heard: yes, Henry, I love you; but take notice, I am not so unreasonable as to aim at engrossing either your attentions or affections; nay, I am so much your friend, that I am content to be second and subordinate in your regards, for I will not stand in the way of your better fortune, nor traverse any of your plans and assignations with a richer, if not a fairer, lady; but where I know, and can depose upon oath, that you have been fast lock'd in her arm's, I tell you ingenuously that mine shall not be long empty, nor shall my passion be slighted, whilst Lady Crowbery's is gratified."

Horror-struck with this dreadful alternative, Henry remained for some moments deprived as it should seem both of sense and motion, and incapable of a reply. To chuse between infamy and ruin, had the danger been all his own, would have cost him little deliberation;

but the first gloomy prospect that opened upon him, was that of his benefactress sacrificed on his account; he saw her in his imagination summoned before her surly tyrant, arraigned, condemned, and delivered over to infamy and disgrace: At the same time his very nature revolted from the loathsome means proposed for preventing this calamity; and was it after all a security to be relied upon? What secret could be safe with a character so abandoned, and a temper so outrageous, as Jemima's? None: to what purpose then should he involve himself in turpitude and guilt, when he could neither keep misfortune from his benefactress by such measures, nor endure his own remorse of conscience in the mean time? And though innocence might not serve either Lady Crowbery or himself as a defence against the malice of Jemima and the injustice of my Lord, yet was he well convinced that nothing in this life could compensate for the loss of it: So far, however, he would yield to the pressure of the moment for the sake of gaining time, as not to irritate Jemima's temper by too peremptory a repulse: He attempted therefore to soothe her by the following expostulation:


"Though I take Heaven to witness that I am as innocent in thought and deed towards the lady you allude to as the child unborn; and though from my soul I believe she is as pure in nature as unsullied snow; yet I know the peril she wou'd incur, and can well conceive the malicious interpretation her innocence wou'd be exposed to, was you so cruelly bent upon her destruction, as to set forth the circumstance, which Bridget has reported to you, in it's worst colours to her ungenerous lord: I know how easy it would be for prejudice like his by false constructions to represent an expression of pity as an act of criminality, and turn the world against her to the ruin of her reputation: But this wou'd be a degree of inhumanity which can never enter into your heart; I am persuaded your nature is not capable of compassing the destruction of an amiable and innocent woman by such horrid means. For my part, sooner than I wou'd be party in such a deed, I wou'd meet death itself, in whatever shape of terror and torment it approach'd me; and believe me, Madam, could I suspect you capable of going these lengths in revenge for any want of attention, which your partiality for me might interpret

into slights, I would rather my life should atone for the offence, than that Lady Crowbery's peace or reputation should be sacrificed through my ill-conduct or neglect."


"Very well," replied Jemima, "then it is in your power to decide upon the fate of that lady, who is so infinitely dear to you, by proportioning your attentions to the value that you set upon my secrecy."


"Prove me then," he cried; "tax me to the extent of my capacity in any honest services; and mark if I decline the trial."


"Honest services!" she repeated; "what are they? I have made a fair confession to you, Henry, and I will not be trifled with."


"I presume," answered he, "you have a sense of that religion you profess so zealously; you have a proper feeling for the dignity and delicacy of your sex; you have a recollection of those solemn promises, to which you pledg'd your faith at the altar—"


"I have a proper sense," replied Jemima, "of your folly and impertinence, in preaching to me, who am establish'd by faith beyond the reach of guilt or the possibility of falling."


"But I," interpos'd Henry, "who cannot boast such an all-availing faith, do not possess

so qualifying a confidence; therefore I must request you will with patience hear a few words from me. The principles which nature and education have instill'd into my heart, are such as teach me to believe no faith can purify the soul which guilt defiles. This doctrine was impress'd upon me by that best of friends, for whose lamented loss I am now in mourning. He was a father to me in effect, though of my real parents I am ignorant. At his death I became destitute, and in that state of absolute distress was found and reliev'd by your worthy husband: Shall I repay him with the blackest treachery? To him I owe the happy chance that cast me on the protection of Lady Crowbery; she was the friend and patroness of my deceas'd benefactor, the Reverend Mr. Ratcliffe; for his sake she bestow'd these bounties upon me, in tender recollection of his valued memory, and in pity for the relict of his care; whilst I was kneeling at her feet in grateful acknowledgment of her goodness, she threw her charitable arms upon my neck in pure benevolence."—"You own it then!" interpos'd Jemima; "'tis enough. Give me only to know that a woman of Lady Crowbery's cast, soft, sentimental, full of tender

passions, and neglected by her husband, goes the length of taking a young fellow like you in her arms; and I will take upon me to say, such a woman can have but one possible motive for what she does. Talk not to me of benevolence and charity: would she embrace a beggar? would she press age and ugliness to her bosom? No, no, Henry, you cannot impose upon me, nor do I believe you are yourself impos'd upon: you are at once the irresistible conqueror of us both, and the only difference between us is, that I have the sincerity to avow a passion for you, and she has the hypocrisy to disguise it."

This said, she turned towards him, and with outspread arms was proceeding to embrace him, when starting back, he exclaimed—"Hold, Madam! I am not saint enough to subscribe to your opinions, nor quite so much of a sinner as to suit your purposes."

He now sprung out of the room, and left her in that state of mind, which is as little intitled to pity as it is calculated to excite envy.



CHAPTER V. Miscellaneous Matters.
AS our hero slowly directed his steps towards the hospitable cottage, pondering the preceding dialogue in his mind, a thousand distracting thoughts took possession of him by turns: sometimes he reproached himself for not having attempted to soothe Jemima with hopes and promises; at other times he almost doubted if he ought not to have sacrificed every scruple for Lady Crowbery's sake; again his spirit rose against such gross impurity, and the fallacy of the maxim 'of doing evil that good might come' struck him in full force.—"If innocence," he cried, "can be no otherwise protected than by the commission of guilt, let it shift for itself." To appeal to the Doctor was to rouse a suspicion in Jemima, that he had betrayed her to him, and that he foresaw would be the certain way to drive her upon retaliation; besides, he knew the amount of Zachary's authority, and how little good was to be looked for from his interference: to apprize Lady Crowbery of her danger was his anxious wish, but by what means he knew not, for neither interview nor letter seemed

either easy or safe to undertake. Ezekiel's fidelity could not be doubted, but as a counsellor in this case, few men could be found less qualified.
Henry had now crossed the green, and was making towards the cottage, when he heard himself accosted by a man in a plain drab riding-coat, and booted, who asked him if that great house at a distance belonged to Lord Crowbery? Henry, who had just then little or no attention for any thing but the thoughts he was immersed in, stared rather wildly at the stranger, and in a peevish kind of tone answered, that he knew nothing at all of the matter.—"That is rather extraordinary," replied the stranger, "for I think I saw you come from the house, where Lady Crowbery has been; and if you are bound to that cottage, you are going where she is."—"And what is that to you, Sir?" demanded Henry, in the same tone, and abruptly turned away from him. He now quickened his pace, and, entering the cottage kitchen, found there Ezekiel and Dame May, who immediately gave him the signal for silence, telling him, in a whisper, that Lady Crowbery and Miss Manstock were in the inner room conferring with

Susan;—"And I hope," added the dame, "that our girl is in a way to get a place with one of them."

The good dame conjectured rightly, for those ladies had been questioning Susan May upon certain preliminary circumstances, proper to be well explained before any overture was made on Miss Manstock's part for hiring her as her waiting-woman. The points, which Susan had to clear, were simply what arose from the aspersions Blachford had cast upon her with respect to Henry; and being straitly interrogated on the subject by Lady Crowbery, she answered, without prevarication or reserve, that to be sure she could not deny a very sincere esteem for Henry, as who could help liking one every way so worthy and so engaging? but as to what that base man, Mr. Blachford, imputed to her, she denied it utterly. It would be well for him, she observed, if he had one grain of that honour which Henry possessed, in such a degree, that she believed he would die a thousand deaths rather than be guilty of such baseness as that vile man had meditated against her: she then related the particulars of his attempt upon her when she solicited him to release Henry from the stocks.

When both ladies had joined in expressing their just abhorrence of such proceeding, with proper commendations of Susan's conduct, she again resumed her confession of attachment to Henry; and after a very animated enumeration of his many excellent qualities, mental and personal, concluded by humbly asking pardon of her hearers for intruding so long upon their patience.—"But you, Madam," said she, addressing herself to Lady Crowbery, "I know to be so kind and considerate, that I am sure you will forgive a poor girl like me if I have said too much, for you know a heart too full will overflow; and to be sure, though I have not the most distant idea of aspiring to Mr. Henry, who I dare say is as much above me in birth as he is in merit and understanding, yet I hope it is no sin to love him, to pray for his happiness and prosperity, and to bless and reverence, as from my soul I do, all those who are good to him, and your ladyship above all."

Susan ceased, and whilst the tears flowed from her soft eyes, a sympathetic shower bedewed the cheeks of Lady Crowbery; the lovely Isabella (for lovely she was, gentle reader, and fair beyond my powers of description) was so

pleased with the sincere and natural character of the girl, that turning to her with a gracious smile, and addressing her in a voice as tuneable as the lyre of Apollo, she said, "I am so charmed with your sincerity, Susan, that if my place is acceptable to you, we are agreed: from this moment you belong to me; and if the malice of Mr. Blachford attempts still to pursue you, depend upon it neither he nor his slander will find admission where I am. As for your attachment to this young person, whom you describe so amiable, though my hard heart has never been touched by the passion of love, and I do not so much as guess what it means, I have nevertheless all the compassion in life for those who suffer by it; and for you, Susan, in particular, who are out of hope of obtaining the object you admire. You must therefore strive to forget him as fast as you can, which, I shou'd suppose, you can find no difficulty in doing."

Susan shook her head, but said nothing: a certain look, which Lady Crowbery bestowed upon her fair cousin, was perhaps not misinterpreted, when she corrected herself by saying,—"I conclude I have been blundering upon something perfectly absurd, which is not to be

wonder'd at when one talks without understanding what one talks about. You know, cousin, I have never been in Susan's situation; and as all my wishes have been constantly prevented by an indulgent father, I really never felt what cou'd seriously be called a disappointment of any sort: in love, at least, I can venture to say, I am pretty secure,"—"Don't be too secure," cried Lady Crowbery, tapping her gently on the cheek as she rose from her chair. And now the ladies, followed by Susan May, entered the room, where Ezekiel, Henry, and Goody May, were assembled.
The happy news was here announced, of Susan's being preferred to wait upon the person of Miss Manstock. This was the height of all earthly happiness that could befall the mother of Susan; and if she herself did not welcome it with quite the same transport, it was not want of value for her young mistress, that damped her joy, for all the neighbourhood rung with Isabella's praise, and Sir Roger Manstock was universally beloved; but there was a pang at the heart of that fond girl, which in the very moment of her good fortune drew a sigh from her breast, and directed her eyes towards Henry with the most pensive expression:

this glance was not unnoticed by Isabella, who followed it in its passage to the countenance of our hero, which being just then overspread with a tender blush, and charactered with the finest touches that pity and benevolence could give it, was perhaps in nature the most dangerous object that a young lady, who had so lately set love at defiance, could encounter; and, was I poetically given, I should here take occasion to introduce that revengeful deity taking aim from behind the person of my hero, like Teucer covered by the shield of Ajax, and launching at the heart of Isabella one of his swiftest and most fatal arrows. Certain it it, there was some busy messenger or other, that flitted in that moment on his malicious errand, and, whispering in her ear, forewarned her, that the god of love was not to be affronted with impunity. The same, perhaps, or some sister spirit equally bent upon mischief, threw an accident in the way of their returning in the carriage, by taking off a shoe from one of the horses, and compelling the driver to resort to the blacksmith for a repair of the damage.
This being reported, Isabella quickly proposed a walk through the plantations, which

her lady cousin as quickly closed with, happy in the excuse for taking her beloved Henry with her. It was in vain therefore that the foolish servant assured his lady the jobb would be done in a few minutes; his evidence was instantly dismissed, and the ladies adjusting their cloaks, set forward without listening to any further demur, accompanied by our hero, blooming with every modest grace that beauty, youth, and sensibility, could unite to adorn him with.
When they entered the plantation they were secure from being overlooked, and then the mother, whose heart yearned towards her new-discovered treasure, pretending to want support, passed her arm under his, and instinctively pressed it to her heart, giving him at the same time a look of unutterable fondness. The action was so marked as not to be misunderstood: Henry felt it, and turned pale with alarm; seized with a sudden faintness, he seemed not less in want of support than the lady herself: she saw his change of countenance, she perceived him tremble as she leant upon him, and perfectly comprehended all the delicacy and distress of his sensations: concealment was no longer generous, it was no

longer safe; nay, it was now no longer in her power. He had stopt short from incapacity to proceed; their mutual embarrassment was too conspicuous to be overlooked by Isabella, had she been ever so industriously accommodating; but of these arts she was perfectly ignorant, and had already run to the assistance of her cousin, very naturally alarmed at her situation, and was tendering a bottle of salts to her; when that lady, in the tenderest tone, exclaimed,—"Oh! my sweet friend, my beloved Isabella, judge not unfavourably of me for the uncommon sensibility, the strong emotions, which you see me seized with: I knew the parents of this youth; dear to me they were as my own life, near as the blood that flows from my own heart."—Here she fell upon Henry's neck, and in her agony sobbed aloud.
At this instant the person of the Viscount was seen advancing towards them in the same walk: there was no further time for explanation; scarce a moment remained for reflection; Henry was bidden to retire with all speed; Lady Crowbery struggled to compose herself for the dreaded rencontre; the affectionate Isabella was employed in chearing and

supporting her; but the interval was momentary, and my Lord at hand.
It was so unusual a thing with him to walk at this hour of day, and in this place, that nothing could be more unlooked for than this meeting: he had now seen with his own eyes a confirmation of what had already been reported to him by Blachford. That gentleman, enraged at seeing all his designs upon Susan May traversed by the interference of Henry, and her resignation of Jemima's service, had paid a visit to that disconsolate dame within a a very few minutes after our hero had left her in a state of mind little short of absolute phrenzy: inflamed as she was to the heighth with rage, indignation, and revenge, the flattering attentions of that insidious visitor, whose gross appetites could batten on a moor, gained thereby the knowledge of an important discovery, and she the gratification of a revengeful passion, well knowing to what malicious purposes he would apply the secret she had imparted to him.
The meeting between the Viscount and his lady, from which so many dreadful reproaches were expected, went off without any; a few words in passing, and those addressed to miss

Manstock, were all that occurred; but Lady Crowbery discovered enough in the sullenness of his look to awaken all her apprehensions, nor was she deceived in her observations: My Lord pursued his way towards Justice Blachford's, and the ladies held on their walk and their discourse till they arrived at the castle.
As soon as Henry had passed the plantationgate that opened upon the village-green, he was again accosted by the stranger in the horseman's coat, who told him he had just picked up a ring in the foot-path, which he conceived had been dropt there by Lady Crowbery as she passed, and begged him to take the charge of returning it to her, as he himself was upon the wing, and could not undertake the delivery of it in person.
Henry took the ring, examined it, was convinced that it belonged to Lady Crowbery; and recollecting that his former treatment of this person, when he broke in upon his meditations, had been none of the most courteous, he was the more desirous to make up for it by his civility on this occasion: the man seemed in that style of life as might be complimented on his honesty without an affront to his dignity.

The ring was of value, for it consisted of a table diamond set in the shape of a heart, under which was a plait of hair, with the words Cecilia Adamant, neatly engraved upon the back of the setting. This, Henry observed, being the maiden-name of Lady Crowbery, was a proof of it's belonging to her, and he therefore suggested it to him as proper to be delivered by his own hands, the meanness of his appearance warranting to add, that he was persuaded that generous lady would wish to make a suitable return to the finder.—"I understand your kind hint," replied the man, "and am thankful to you for it; if her Ladyship should be pleased in her bounty to take any consideration for the finder of this trinket, be so good to tell her, it is a poor man lately returned from transportation, who will thankfully receive her favours through your hands; but as I don't think it safe to put myself in the way of Lord Crowbery, circumstanced as I am, so I do most earnestly conjure you not to give the ring to my Lady in his presence, nor to let any intimation reach him that may expose me to be traced as the finder of it: for the present, it will not be prudent for me to tarry here any longer; sometime hence I may call upon you

again."—"Sometime hence," replied Henry, "I may chance not to be found here; but call at that cottage, and whatever is there deposited will be honestly delivered to you by the good people of the house: you know your own danger best, but if returning from transportation constitutes any part of it, I should think you had better have been silent on that head; however, you may depend upon it I shall not betray your trust either in one case or the other."


"Sir," rejoined the stranger, "permit me to say, there is something in your countenance that assures me I might repose greater trusts than this in your keeping without hazard; the good woman of the cottage you pointed to has made me acquainted with your adventures in this place, and you must allow me to say that I honour you from my soul: though I have been a guilty man in my time (which you will readily believe, having told you I am newly return'd from transportation) yet I love virtue, and reverence brave, humane and virtuous persons like you: I have been also told of Lady Crowbery's generosity to you, and I applaud her for it; charity is a lovely quality, but frailty is of the very essence of woman;

and I beseech you to recollect that Lady Crowbery is a wife."

This said, he hastily turned away, and before our hero could recover the surprize which a speech so unexpected had thrown him into, the stranger was out of sight.


CHAPTER VI. A figurative Style is apt to puzzle a plain Understanding.
WHEN Henry returned to the cottage, he found Ezekiel sitting with old Weevil, the miller, who had come to report the convalescence of his son; and as he really bore a grateful mind towards our hero, it was with great pleasure he congratulated him on the happy change in his fortune and appearance: he then began to sound forth the praises of Lady Crowbery for her charities; and when he had run on in this strain for some time, frequently appealing to Henry, who made no reply, he looked at him with a degree of surprize, and said,—"How is this, friend Henry? You say nothing all this while."—Our hero now answered, that if he was silent on the subject, it

was not from want of gratitude, but because he knew that Lady did not wish her good deeds to be talked of.—"Heyday!" cried Weevil, "what is the value of a good deed, if the world does not know it? For my part, if I do a man a kind turn, I am the first to let him hear of it; for where would be the pleasure of doing it else; and how can I expect a return of the same kindness, if I don't let him understand from whence it came?"—Then turning to Ezekiel, who did not seem to relish his notions, and had exhibited certain tokens that they would not pass unquestioned, he demanded of him, with an air of raillery, if he preached such sort of charity as that lady was supposed to practise?
Ezekiel rose from his seat, and drawing himself up into an erect posture, as his custom was when he debated any interesting point—"Neighbour Weevil," he cried, "you demand of me, as a preacher, if I recommend to my flock such sort of charity as this good lady practiseth; and I demand of thee, as a Christian, if thy pastor hath never taught thee that good lesson, "Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth?"



"I hope I know that without his telling,"

quoth the miller, "for surely no man would put his hand into his neighbour's sack, and be fool enough to blazon his own shame; I think he would be but a silly fellow, who did not keep his own council in such a case; but that any one should be ashamed of giving away their alms, and take no credit for what they bestow, seems to me an unaccountable piece of business; for why should I lay out my money and get nothing for it?"


"And is it nothing," cried the preacher, elevating his voice, and rising on his insteps, "to purchase that divine sensation, which springs within the human breast when we relieve the sufferings of a fellow-creature? Is the self-approving testimony of a good conscience nothing worth, unless echoed back upon thee by the applauses of the world? The eye of the Almighty is upon the deeds of men, whether they be good or evil; nay, more than that, it penetrates to the heart, and discerns the motives and secret springs which govern it. Is it not enough for man to know, that he, who seeth in secret, will reward us openly? I hope, friend Weevil, thou art not a man of that pharisaical kidney, as loveth greetings in the

market-place, and delighteth to blow a trumpet before thee."


"I blow a trumpet!" replied the miller, somewhat angrily; "I don't know what you mean by suspecting me of such mountebank tricks; and as for greetings in the market-place, whether I love 'em or not is no matter; but I have plenty of them without asking for, for I don't go there without my money; they are glad enough to greet me, friend Zekiel, for I am a fair trader, do you see, and neither blow trumpet or horn to call customers about me, and bring grist to my mill: No, no, if they like my dealings they are welcome; if not, let 'em go elsewhere. If the mill were never to go till I blew a trumpet, it wou'd stand still to everlasting for me; but I can't say so much for you, Doctor, in your way of trade; you may be said to blow a trumpet, methinks, when you are perch'd up in a tree, hooting and howling and preaching the end of the world to a parcel of poor scar'd wretches, that are ready, through fright, to hang themselves upon the branches of it: this I call blowing a trumpet, master Zekiel," added he, "and such a trumpet it is, that with my good

will shall never enter these ears whilst they are fixt to my head."


"Be it so, scorner, be it so," replied the preacher: "if thy heart be harden'd even to the consistency of one of thine own mill-stones, whose misfortune is it but thine own? Pharaoh's heart was also in like case, he was harden'd against the warnings of the meek man Moses, and what was his fate? Whelm'd in the red sea, swallow'd up, drown'd, Gaffer Weevil, drown'd I say, as thou perchance may'st be for a judgment in thine own mill-tail; which, God forbid! for I would rather wish thee to live and to repent: nay, hath not a judgment fallen upon thee already, a terrible judgment, from which thou art newly escap'd? and wilt thou not obey the warning, as holy David obey'd, when the Lord smote the son of Bathsheba for his sins? Will nothing awaken thee but the last trump, thou deaf adder?"

Here Ezekial Daw turned his eyes towards the place, that had lately been occupied by the person of Weevil, and discovered nothing there within his ken save an old elbow-chair, literally as void of edification as the deaf adder; miller Weevil having neither carried that

away with him, nor one single word of instruction from the late expostulatory harangue. "I protest," quoth Ezekiel, as he looked about for Weevil, "the man hath disappear'd, and the chair of the scorner is left empty: Good hope," added he, sitting down in it at the same time, "I shall not offend against the Psalmist's precept by placing myself in his stead."


"No fear of that," said Henry, "the words are not to be taken in their literal sense"—"Humph!" replied the preacher, "don't be too sure of that, young man; it is early day for such as thou art to set up for an expounder of holy writ."—"I beg pardon," answered the youth; "if I had been aware there could have been two opinions in the case, I should have held back my own till I heard what your's was."—"All is well," rejoined the other, "I do not reprove thee, child, but for thy good; I would warn thee against the example of that froward man, who hath newly departed in his error, and suddenly disappeared, whilst my eye was not upon him:"—A circumstance, that could hardly have happened to any other person than Ezekiel, whose eye, like the poet's, had been rolling in so fine a phrensy, that the miller and every other person about him might

have walked out of company at that moment without his seeing them.
The good man, who, as we have before observed, was only patient upon principle, had been not a little nettled at the retort of the trumpet, which being a martial instrument, had sounded a note in his ear, that had some what roused the natural ardour of his spirit; a hint, which we think fit to give to the sagacious reader, who might else conceive there was hardly cause sufficient for the vivacity of his reproof to our young hero, whose nature certainly was not prone to give offence, nor wanting in humility; in proof of which we take leave to add, that he quietly submitted to a long lecture from Doctor Daw upon that very virtue, of which it was plain he had a much greater share by nature than, his teacher.


CHAPTER VII. The Events of this Life are chequered with Good and Evil.
DAME May now returned to the cottage, having circulated the happy tidings of her daughter's promotion into every house of

the village, where she could find an acquaintance at leisure to give her the hearing; and as we are never better disposed to rejoice with others than when we are joyful ourselves, so it was with this good woman, whose heart, though naturally apt to sympathize, was at this moment in the best humour possible to take a friendly share in Henry's good fortune: whilst her eyes overflowed with pleasure at the sight of him in his new apparel, her tongue poured forth praises in abundance, and blessings without stint upon his generous benefactress.
The hostile cabal assembled at Blachford's were in the mean time projecting ways and means of revenge; for Lord Crowbery had joined them full fraught with what he called ocular demonstration of his lady's misconduct; for though he had observed a sullen silence when he met her in the plantation, nothing which there passed had escaped his observation; and the reader will recollect enough of her situation to acknowledge it was a very suspicious one: the credit of Jemima's intelligence, as reported to him by his friend Blachford, was now completely established, and his mind prepared for any measures of revenge, that could be proposed to him; but as it was

his practice in all cases of danger to keep himself out of sight, and put his proxies in the front, his caution did not forsake him upon the meeting with his lady, and he prudently forbore to waste any of his noble anger in words, not wishing either that Miss Manstock should witness them, or that Henry should be called to an altercation on the spot; whether because he deemed him too ignoble for his personal resentment, or too gallant to submit to his insult, must be left as matter of opinion; we do not wish to have any correspondence with his lordship's private meditations; as to his discussions with Lady Crowbery, he was very ingenious in selecting proper times and seasons for them. The cabal now sitting consisted of Blachford, Captain Crowbery of the marines, and Fulford, an attorney; gentlemen entirely devoted to his lordship, and the major part at least not immoderately prejudiced by the secret dictates of justice, conscience, or honour.
The inmates of the cottage were now collected, for Susan had joined the party, but not with the same joyous spirits that her mother had brought amongst them; a secret melancholy seemed to weigh upon her heart, and Henry, who well divined the cause, between

compassion for her and alarm for Lady Crowbery, found ample occupation for his thoughts: as for Ezekiel Daw, the even tenor of his spirits was not apt to be discomposed either by the fortunate or unfortunate events of this life.
One of the first measures resolved upon by the cabal, had been to expel the tenants of the cottage from their humble abode; the tenement belonged to Blachford, and was held at will; so long as he softer'd any hopes of succeeding with the daughter, that considerate gentleman had been a very easy landlord to the mother; but now that he saw his designs blasted, first by her attachment to Henry, and secondly, by her engagement with Miss Manstock, his charity cooled so fast, that he commissioned Fulford the attorney not only to warn her mother from the premisses, but also to enforce payment of certain arrears of rent, which he had abstained to demand from motives above-mentioned; nay, it was asserted on the part of the poor widow, that as far as any unwitnessed promise could avail, he had passed his word to her for an acquittal of the whole.
Charged with these instructions, Fulford

now presented himself to the party in the cottage, and in proper terms of office delivered himself of his commission. Goody May heard the warning, and demand accompanying it, with horror proportioned to the distress it menaced her with. The bounty of Lady Crowbery in consideration of her kindness to Henry, had just enriched her with a sum, which this demand so nearly involved, that she felt herself in imagination even poorer than she was before; her flattering hopes of peace and plenty vanished like a dream; stript by her deceitful creditor of all her stock of wealth, and thrust out of her cottage, she knew herself to be excluded in effect from the parish, where she had long dwelt in the good esteem of the villagers, and by the humble exercise of her art had hitherto contrived to earn a decent maintenance; it was a further aggravation to her sorrows, that in this distress her friend and inmate Ezekiel was to be a sharer: she fixed her eyes upon the countenance of the attorney, she saw no movements of compassion there; she then turned them upon her friends assembled around her, she drew no comfort from their looks, threw herself into a chair and burst into tears.

Ezekiel seeing this, put himself between Fulford and the door, towards which he was retreating, and gently laying his hand upon his breast in the action of stopping him, with a steady look and solemn tone, addressed him in the following words—"Mr. Fulford, you are an attorney; and pity, though not unknown to some of your profession, is certainly no part of your business here; I shall not therefore trouble you by appealing to what it is evident you do not possess: whether this poor woman is at this instant furnish'd with money sufficient to discharge your demand, I cannot take upon me to say; I myself have some little matter in hand, which will be forth coming at her call."—"I have enough, and more than enough," cried Henry—"Peace, young man," replied the preacher, "and interrupt me not: this gentleman's time is too precious to listen to the modes we shall take for raising the sum he requires of us, neither is his nature likely to be softened by any difficulties we are put to in providing it: with your leave, therefore, Mr. Attorney, we shall desire you will signify to your principal, that we do not oppose ourselves to the power which the law has given him

over us, for expelling us from his cottage: tell him we have received his orders, and are preparing to obey them, but say withal, that they have wrung the tears from the eyes of the widow, and let him prepare himself to answer the appeal that is gone up against him."


"Lookye, Master Daw," replied Fulford, "how all that may be is another case, and coram non nobis as we say; my commission extends no farther than to the widow May; she is the party I am to look to; with respect to you I have no instructions, and for aught I know, you may have his worship's leave for remaining on the premisses,"—"How say you, sir?" exclaimed Ezekiel, "may I have his leave to abandon this poor widow? I will neither take his leave, nor his example, for any thing so base and dastardly: he shall never teach me to be cruel like himself, he shall never seduce me to make promises of protection and afterwards revoke them; I reject his favour, and will persist in my integrity."


"You know your own business best," quoth Fulford; "I am to look for the rent, or distrain to the amount."—"Name it," cried Henry, "produce your bill, I am prepared

to discharge it"—And who are you," replied Fulford, "that take upon yourself to speak to a gentleman in so peremptory a stile?"—"I speak to you," said Henry, "as I shou'd to your principal"—"Speak then to my principal," replied the attorney; and turning on his heel, quitted the company.
Before he had gone many paces from the door, Isabella, accompanied by her father, entered the cottage: Goody May had not yet dried her tears, and the cause of them being enquired into by her worthy visitors, gave her an opportunity of relating what had passed. Sir Roger Manstock, whose heart was ever open to a case of pity, and who well knew the hateful character of Blachford, bade her be comforted, for that he would provide her with a habitation on his own estate, and in the near neighbourhood of her daughter, where she should be at least as well lodged and better protected than she was at present—"As for the little matter of rent," added he, "which Mr. Blachford thinks fit to exact of you, notwithstanding his word to the contrary, if one of you will step out and call back the attorney, we will discharge it on the spot."

Henry flew upon the errand, and was at

Blachford's door in an instant, where that gentleman was then standing with Fulford at his elbow. At the name of Sir Roger Manstock he started, swelled with pride and passion, and strode away with hasty steps to the cottage, ordering the attorney to follow him.

"Give me leave," said he, as he set his foot within the door, "to tell you, Sir Roger Manstock, that I do not hold it proper behaviour from one gentleman to another to interfere between me and my tenant, and spirit her out of my house for the invidious purpose of casting an odium upon my character, as if I was a tyrant and persecutor of the poor: I would have the world to know that I have as much humanity as yourself or any man breathing, and I don't see what right you have to take for granted that I intend to go the length of driving this woman out of her house at any rate."


"Mr. Blachford," replied the venerable baronet, "you have put an interpretation upon my motives so contrary to what has ever governed my actions, that I should be warranted in making no reply to your invectives; but I am an old man pretty well known in this neighbourhood, and little afraid of being misunderstood by any body but yourself. If your

attorney did not warn this poor widow from her house by your authority, I have stept into a business by mistake, which does not belong to me; if, on the contrary he did, I have as much right to take her into my protection, as you can have to put her out of your's, and that protection I will give, though your persecution should extend to every other person under this roof."

Blachford's dusky visage turned purple with rage, he gnawed his lip, knit his sooty brows, and sullenly replied, "It is no concern of mine how many vagabonds you take into your house, so mine is clear of them."—Upon the instant stept forward our young hero, and darting a look like that which our immortal bard bestows upon the seraph Abdiel before he encounters the grand apostate.—"Now," said he, "your virulence so clearly points at me, that I am warranted to reply to you; and first, I tell you, I will not permit you to lose the respect due to a venerable character, which none but one devoid of every manly, every virtuous feeling, would have the baseness to defame: in the next place, I have a word for you in answer to the aspersions you have thrown out against this innocent young woman,

in which you have brought my honour into question, and for which you ought to blush, knowing your own infamous attempts upon her person; but as your turpitude is such, that to speak of it in this presence would be a breach of decency, I desire you will step out with me, and I will breathe one word in your ear; which, if you have the spirit of a man, you will know how to reply to."

This said, Henry stept nimbly out of the door, and Blachford, attended by his lawyer, sullenly followed.—"In the name of the Lord," cried Ezekiel, grasping his crab-stick, "I will also go forth."—At this moment Isabella gave a sigh, and fell back in her chair.


CHAPTER VIII. How deep and secret are the Seeds of Love!
AS soon as Blachford was on the outside of the door, Henry, who had stopt for him, accosted him, and said, "I now repeat to you, that your attempt upon Susan May was infamous; and that when you told Lord Crowbery that innocent girl had been criminal with me, you told a most impudent and abominable

lie."—"Very well, Sir," replied Blachford, "I shall not talk with you now: you shall hear from me in another way."—The cowardly bully slunk away, and Henry returned to the cottage, but not till Ezekiel, brandishing his crab-stick, had marched up to him, and declared, with an observation little short of an oath, that if he had turned out with the Justice, he himself would have undertaken for the attorney, and—"Grace of God," added he, "I trust I should have smitten him to the earth, even thereafter as the prophet Samuel smote Agag."

When Henry entered the cottage, he found the women anxiously employed in bringing Isabella out of a swoon.—"Heaven defend me," he exclaimed, "what is the matter?" Dame May had dropt some hartshorn into water; Henry, scarce knowing what he did, seized the cup, and presented it to the lips of the drooping beauty; at that moment she opened her eyes—"And are you safe?" she said, then took the contents of the cup, and presently revived.
In a few minutes Isabella was perfectly recovered, and then Sir Roger Manstock began to express himself in the kindest terms to

Henry: he required to know what had passed between him and Blachford; exhorted him very earnestly not to enter into any quarrel with a man of so malicious a character, and very cordially invited him to take refuge in Manstock-house—"For I am persuaded," said he, "that both Blachford, and, I am sorry to add, Lord Crowbery himself, will set every engine at work to play off some diabolical plot upon you."


"Indeed, Sir," said Isabella, turning her eyes upon him with the tenderest expression, "you are in the greatest danger whilst you remain amongst them; my dear father gives you the best counsel, and you will do well to get out of their way; for only think what affliction it would give to my poor cousin, if any harm was to befall you."


"She is infinitely good," replied Henry, "and her solicitude gives some value to a life, which, circumstanced as it was a while ago, would scarce have merited my care."—"If that be so," resumed Isabella, "I am confident it is her wish that you should accept my father's invitation; and, after what I have now been a witness to, permit me to say, it is mine also."—"You honour me too much," replied

he, "and I can make no other return to such unmerited kindness, than by assuring Sir Roger Manstock and yourself of my unalterable respect and gratitude."

This point being so settled, the worthy baronet and his fair daughter took their leave of the good people, Sir Roger having shaken Henry very cordially by the hand, and assured him of a hearty welcome at Manstock-house. Upon their arrival at the castle, they found Lady Crowbery alone, and employed at her writing-table; their carriage was at the door, and they had called to bid her farewell. Sir Roger related to her all that had been passing at the cottage, and said so many handsome things of Henry, both with respect to his behaviour, person and spirit, that whilst her heart trembled for his safety, it overflowed with joy upon hearing him so praised.—"And now," said the baronet, "we must think of something for him out of hand, for there is a deal of malice brewing against him in the hearts of this Blachford and his crew: he has a gallant spirit; I think his turn seems to lie towards the army."


"It is too clear," replied Lady Crowbery, "what dangers beset him, and with whom they

spring: that I shall have my share in them, I can well believe; I expect no less, and am preparing myself to meet it. In the mean time, to remove him to some place of safety seems the first thing needful; of his future destination we may decide at leisure."—"But my father," cried Isabella, "has invited him, and he is coming to Manstock-house."—Lady Crowbery smiled; but whether it was from the joy she took in the intelligence, or from something she observed in the eagerness of Isabella's manner, or from a mixture of causes, we must leave to conjecture; certain it is, that the finest eyes in nature were just then illuminated with uncommon vivacity, and the sweetest countenance overspread with a blush, whose exquisite carnation no art can imitate.
After a few minutes spent in making their affectionate adieus, they parted; Sir Roger Manstock and his fair daughter to their own home, and Lady Crowbery resumed her pen; the productions of which, it is more than probable, our readers will hereafter be acquainted with.
We shall now look back to the cottage, where the agitation, in which we left our friends, had not yet subsided. Ezekiel was

gone forth upon the Green, and being there joined by several of his neighbours, with whom he was in general favour, had been giving them a valedictory harangue, with some occasional comments upon Justice Blachford's inhumanity to the widow; that good woman, in the mean while, who had not the fault of keeping an idle tongue, was no less busy in a different quarter; and perhaps there was not a corner in the parish where she was not beloved and the Justice abhorred, so that all voices were loud in her cause; even John Jenkins, a fellow of notorious levity, and the obstreperous cow-boy, his brother, were on the side of the sufferers, and joined in the cry against their village-tyrant with the rest.
Henry and Susan alone kept house; he pondering on a variety of interesting matters, she probably on only one object, and that before her eyes. Opportunities like the present she had little prospect of in future; her heart fluttered, her spirits wavered betwixt hope and despair: she sighed, and gently resting her arm upon his shoulder, "Alas! for me," she cried, "my happy hours have been but few, and they are past: You'll think no more of me when this fine lady occupies your heart: I see it coming

on, I see it plainly."—"Impossible!" he replied, "my thoughts are otherwise employ'd; they never can aspire so high."—"Ah, Henry!" resumed she, "this is but feign'd humility; you've seen enough to know that I am right: You and I shall take no more such walks together as we have done; you will have a fairer companion in your rambles through the groves at Manstock; and let me own 'tis fit you shou'd; I am not worthy of you; you are in all respects above me, and it was only in your distress'd and humble state that I aspir'd to think of you, to consort with you, and to love you: If I have been too forward, and offended you, do not remember me with contempt, but pardon a fond girl that can never cease to bear you a devoted faithful heart."

Susan never looked so lovely in the eyes of Henry as at this moment: the melancholy tone in which these words were uttered, the modest air accompanying their delivery, her sighs, her tears, her blushes, touched him more sensibly than all the playful smiles that in her gayer moments she had glanced upon him. Every thing that his compassionate nature could suggest to console and soothe her he said and did without reserve, for every passion seemed now

buried in affliction; and as for such caresses as honour might allow of, he deemed it cruelty to withhold them.—But here let me insert one caution to my youthful readers how they surrender themselves to the indulgence of that dangerous propensity called pity, which, if it is not love itself, is yet so closely allied to it, that wherever the interests of the one can be served, there is no safety in committing yourselves to the other. Of the truth of this remark our inexperienced Henry may serve for an example; seduced by pure compassion into the office of a comforter, he found himself surprized into emotions, which it required the strongest resolution to controul; and so gentle was the current, so pleasingly deceitful the gradations by which he was carried on towards that gulph, where honour would have been lost, that had not the recollection of his late reproach to Blachford timely warned his conscience to avoid the guilt which he condemned in another, he had here been overthrown, and we must have devoted one unwilling page to the lamented record of his shame; for opportunity courted him, beauty smiled upon him, love allured, and Susan whispered an inviting challenge in his ear, that fairly set all prudence at defiance; in short, malicious Fortune

seemed to have trepanned him into a situation with this tempting girl, exactly of a piece with their's, to whose incontinence he owed his birth.

"Then I must marry you," was his apology to Susan's rash proposal.—"I ask no such sacrifice," replied the damsel.—"This hospitable roof will fall upon my head."—"Away with all such scruples," she again replied, and press'd him in her arms.—"'Tis a hard struggle!" he exclaimed, "but, by the Power that guards me, I will never be a Blachford!"—With these words he sprung from her embrace: the snares of love, that had so nearly closed upon him, gave way, and burst at once; the vanquished passions fled, and Virtue put her wreath of triumph on his brow!
A momentary glance of anger darted from the eyes of Susan, as she exclaimed,—"Heavens! can you use me thus?"—But it was only a glance; resentment had no lasting tenure in her breast; her heart, though liable to be surprized by love, was not surrendered to dishonour: She rallied her disordered thoughts, looked back upon the past with conscious self-reproach for her own desperation, and, covered with confusion, hid her face.



CHAPTER IX. A Funeral Oration out of Place.
IN the council, that sate upon the fate of Henry, there were as many opinions as there were members: Fulford, who looked for no resources but what were to be found in his own profession, recommended the ejectment; and of this we have already seen the result, which certainly was not very flattering to the projector.
Captain Crowbery, whose ideas, like those of Fulford, were of the professional sort, was for bolder measures, and undertook, through his interest with a friend, who commanded a pressgang then upon the coast, to take our hero off, unknown to all his friends, and ship him in a tender: This proposal, which did not interfere with the legal proceeding before mentioned, nor involve any one of the junto either in difficulties or dangers, was universally approved of, and had in fact every merit that a revengeful plot could boast of: It was therefore resolved, nem. con. that the Captain should set forth in search of his friend, and concert the means of carrying it into execution secretly and securely;

Lord Crowbery enjoying by anticipation, the agonies of his Lady when her favourite should disappear on a sudden, and no one could account for it.
But Blachford, whose nature, though by no means brave, was bloody and revengeful, and whose pride was stung to the quick by the spirited retort which Henry had cast in his teeth, had an underplot of his own, which, for good reasons, he withheld from his assessors, conscious that it would neither tally with the legal notions of the attorney, nor probably suit the more martial spirit of the Captain; nay, he had his doubts if even my Lord would be fond of giving countenance to it; for it was neither more nor less than to assassinate Henry, or, in the vulgar phrase, knock him down in the dark, and leave him to his chance for life or death when he had done with him.
Blachford in his chair of justice could expatiate, as we have seen, with all due solemnity upon the heinous crime of murder; but Blachford in his private character was the very man in the world to project the perpetration, though not just the person to undertake the hazard of executing such an act: He was provided with a confidential servant, whom Nature

seemed to have qualified for these purposes with the most absolute insensibility both of danger and humanity. This adroit personage, by name Lawrence O'Rourke, whose origin was to be sought in the west of Connaught, had been taken into Blachford's service, when he first commenced planter in Jamaica; and so faithfully had he ministered to the cruelties of his master, that it was generally thought most of the memorable acts were done by his hands, for which that gentleman became distinguished in those parts by the title of Bloody Bob Blachford.
The moon was at this time commodiously in her last quarter: Lord Crowbery had signified his intention of summoning Henry to the castle that evening, and it occurred to Blachford that the opportunity was favourable for way-laying him on his return through the grove, where Larry O'Rourke undertook to post himself, armed with a stout bludgeon, in the use and exercise of which he was very expert.
In the mean time Ezekiel and Goody May, having in their different quarters disseminated the story of Blachford's employing his attorney to eject them from their cottage, through the whole village, the indignation became general,

and some of the younger people began to employ themselves in the making and erecting of a very stately gibbet in the centre of the Green, and in full view from the windows of his worship's mansion, for the purpose of executing that venerable magistrate by proxy on the spot. This proxy, which was a very reasonable likeness of it's principal, was seated in a tumbril, with it's arms tied behind it in a very orthodox manner, and seemed only to wait the prayers of some charitable person, before it received the word of command for being hoisted up to the place of it's execution. In this awful interim it occurred to the ingenious projectors of this moral machinery, that if Doctor Daw could be prevailed upon to give it his passport to the other world, they might launch it off with becoming grace, and the spectators be edified by the catastrophe.
It was in the dusk of the evening, and Ezekiel had just knocked the ashes out of his last pipe, when the noise and hubbub on the Green called him forth. No sooner had the figure in the tumbril crossed his optic nerves in the obscurity of the twilight, than those aforesaid nerves suggested to his sensorium an idea, that the enraged mob were actually about to execute

a living man without judge or jury. Horror-struck at the sight, he rushed amongst them, vociferating by the way, "For the Lord's sake, neighbours! what are you about? Are you mad? Are you going to commit murder?"—"No, no," cried one of the throng, "we are only gibbetting the Squire for turning you and Goody May out of doors."—"Od's my life!" cried Ezekiel, coming nearer to the figure, and discovering something like a human face, with an enormous pair of black eyebrows, "I protest to truth it did deceive me: Never trust me if it is not a striking likeness of that unworthy person who has turned the widow from his door, and assailed the chastity of her daughter: would to Heaven the original were as harmless as the copy! Oh! thou monster of uncleanness" (for now the spirit had taken hold of him, and he had again forgot he was addressing himself to a dumb image) "Oh! thou idolatrous worshipper of filthy Belial! outcast from grace, and given up to work all manner of whoredoms and abominations in the land; justly art thou cut off in thy sins, thou he-goat of the flock of Beelzebub! Have you eyes, ye lookers-on, and can you see the fate of this unholy one without trembling? Have you ears, and can you hear me and not

mark? Hearts have you, ye obdurate sinners! and will you not understand how terrible is the latter end of the wicked? Let him that coveteth his neighbour's daughter take warning by this wretch's fate! What is the lust of the eye? a snare: What the evil motion of the heart? a serpent in your bosom: What the war of the members provoking to uncleanness? a ramping and a roaring lion. Maidens! (if there be any here that answer to that name) remember that the chastity of a damsel is like the dew-drop on the flower; the sun shineth wantonly upon it, and it is gone: Keep yourselves in the shade; let your concealment be your safeguard, ye are then only secure when no one can approach you: Handle not the asp, for it will sting you; put not your hand to the cockatrice's nest, for there is poison in the tooth of it, and it hath the bite of mortal death."

Whilst these words were upon his lips, Ezekiel, to his utter astonishment, beheld the figure slowly ascend out of the cart; and by the operation of a rope and pulley (of neither of which, good man! he had taken any account, being then warmly engaged with the cockatrice) mount into the air, suspended by the neck from the cross-bar of the gibbet. He cast

his eyes upwards with pity and amaze, and piously ejaculated, in the charity of his heart,—"The Lord have mercy upon thy soul!"—"Amen!" echoed John Jenkins, who performed the office of hangman, and at the same time run the vice-justice up by the pulley. John was the idlest fellow in the parish, and most in the ill graces of Doctor Daw, for the looseness of his morals.—"Here he goes to the devil in a whiff," quoth Jenkins.—"Art thou so familiar with the devil," said Ezekiel, "as to know whom he will take, and whom he will spare? Have a care of one, John Jenkins, and do not venture to pronounce upon thy neighbours."—John was too busy to enter into argument, so Ezekiel had the last word, and turned aside towards the cottage.
The mob, under the conduct of General Jenkins, the hangman, marched in array to Dame May's cottage, and having drawn up before the door, Jenkins being deputed as spokesman, announced himself, and was admitted.—"By your leave, Dame May," quoth the orator, "we mean you no offence; but being, as you do see, your friends and neighbours, we come to cheer you a bit in your affliction, by telling you, for your comfort, we have gibbetted

the Justice upon the Green; and if we had treated him as such a hard-hearted fellow deserves, we shou'd have pull'd his house stick and stone down to the ground; so there's the right o' the matter. As for thee, Henry, give me thy hand, my brave lad! I will stand by the man that will stand by a woman as long as I have life, dammee! I beg your pardon, Doctor, for swearing, but when a man's heart is right, lookye, what he says goes for nothing; as for a few hasty words, it is to be hop'd there'll be no account taken of them."


"I hope so too," quoth Ezekiel, in an under-tone. Dame May returned her thanks; Henry shook the orator by the hand, and the mob, according to custom, adjourned to the alehouse.


CHAPTER X. The trampled Worm will turn.
THE news of the gibbetting flew to Blachford's ears by one of the nimblest couriers Fame had in her service; it made him furious, and as he laid it all to Henry's account, it

rendered him as hungry for his prey as a hyaena.
The haughty Peer now seated in his castle, and encompassed by his myrmidons, dispatched a servant with his summons for Henry to attend upon him: What particular purpose he meant to effect by this, does not clearly appear, but it is not unlikely Blachford was the mover of it, with the view of wreaking his vengeance upon the youth by the hands of O'Rourke, on his return from the conference.
The messenger being dispatched for Henry, order was given by the Peer, that his lady should come to him: Blachford and the attorney thereupon took the hint to retire, and her Ladyship, having obeyed the call, was welcomed in manner following—"So Madam, you are come; be pleas'd to take your seat, I have something to say to you. What are the motives, I would fain know, for your late visits to my apothecary in the village? I did not know you was out of health, or, if you are, methinks it is his duty to attend upon you."


"But he is confin'd to his chamber, my lord."


"So ought you to be, my lady, and so

shall you be, if you have no more regard for my honour and your own dignity, than to be seen gossiping and caballing in beggarly cottages, with vagabonds and strumpets, for purposes I blush to name."—"What strumpets and what vagabonds," replied the lady, "do you charge me of caballing with; and what purposes have I ever had in hand, which you, my lord, shou'd blush to name? Declare them."


"Declare to me first, if you can, who that young fellow is, you have been graciously pleas'd to furnish with cloathes and money, and pick up out of the dirt; a beggarly vagrant, for the worthy purpose, amongst others that shall be nameless, of insulting my friend Mr. Blachford in the most public and daring manner, for which he shall be made an example of my vengeance, be assur'd, though your folly, Lady Crowbery, (to say no worse of it) shou'd be expos'd thereby to all the world. Who is this fellow, I demand? What is his name? What is his business here? What are the mighty charms you can discover in the embraces of a beggar? what the sense of your own honour, that you shou'd fall into his arms, as these eyes have witness'd? And have you not

repeatedly done this? Can you deny the charge? and what excuse are you provided with to offer to a husband, who will not tamely suffer such unparallel'd disgrace?"

The vehemence, with which all this was uttered, the variety of questions it contained, her unwillingness to answer some, and her incapacity of accounting for others (for she was not yet informed of Blachford's late affair) so totally overpower'd the tender and maternal feelings of Lady Crowbery, that unable to collect her thoughts, she remained silent and without an answer.
After some little pause, regarding her with a look of anger and contempt, he exclaimed—"'Tis well, madam, 'tis very well! I take your silence for confession, and your tears for tokens of your shame. I now tell you that I have sent for your fellow hither; I wou'd fain see this favour'd rival, whom you have singled out to disgrace me. Was he worthy the resentment of a gentleman, I wou'd not part from him till the life of one of us was sacrific'd to honour; but being what he is, the lowest, basest, vilest of mankind, fitter chastisement shall be provided for him."


"Hold, my Lord!" she now exclaimed, resuming

on the sudden a composed and energetic tone of voice; "hold, my Lord Crowbery, nor drive me quite to desperation by your ferocious menaces and false unfounded glances at my reputation, which defies your charge. If you demand to know why I have reach'd out the hand of charity to this young man, whom you arraign so cruelly, it is because my heart hath feeling for the unfortunate, when undeservedly oppress'd, for the stranger and the friendless, for the benevolent, the brave, the generous preserver of another's life, for which he had nearly sacrific'd his own—in one word for the relict of a dear departed friend, the last bequest of Ratcliffe, a foundling dropt at his door and adopted by his charity. You have sent for him, you say; you will then see him, hear him, question him, and if you have a heart, approve, admire."—"This to my face!" he cried in a transport of rage; "this to my face! By Heaven I'll not endure it, I'll not live with you, I'll not cohabit with a woman as my wife, who dares to uphold and praise her paramour to my very face."


"My paramour do you call him? Alas! how widely do you mistake!"—Here she dropped her voice, and accompanied these

few words with an action and motion of the head so mournful, as seemed to strengthen his suspicions rather than allay them, for he now grew louder in reproach, and with an oath denounced determined separation.

"Be it so," she replied; "acquitted by my own conscience, I shall patiently submit to what you threaten, and will appeal to time and Heaven's good pleasure for the rest: only this I tell you, and accept it from me as a salutary caution, beware how you insult too far a brave, though temperate, spirit."

This said, a servant announced the arrival of our hero.—"Already!" cried my Lord, in a tone of surprize; What struck upon his mind at that particular moment to discompose him, is more than we pretend to account for; discompos'd he certainly was, 'till recollecting that some order must be given to the servant, who was attending for that purpose, he cried out—"Let the fellow wait."—After a pause, turning a severe look upon his lady, he said,—"I shall exact from you, madam, your most solemn promise never to see or communicate with this fellow more."—"I have told you," she replied, "who and what this fellow as you call him is, and I should be a hypocrite

to say I will not fulfil a trust of the most sacred sort that friendship can bequeath: but why need you exact, or I make any promises, when you are determin'd on a separation, that will release me from your authority, and leave me to account to conscience only for the rectitude of my conduct?"—"But you are not yet in that happy state of freedom," he cried, "and I will be obeyed!"—To this no answer was returned.
He started hastily from his seat, walked a turn or two up and down the room, and then in a sullen tone said, "Perhaps you expect to see your favourite triumph in his insolence; you'll be mistaken: Please to leave the room."—"Willingly," she replied, "and from this moment I regard it as my dismission." Her firmness staggered him; he would have called her back, but pride withheld him: Suspicious that his lady in her present temper might in defiance of his orders attempt an interview with the youth in waiting, he rung the bell with vehemence, and called for his attendance on the instant.
Henry made his entrance, bowing respectfully to the Peer, who seated with all due state, from which he did not in the slightest degree

relax, eyed him over from heel to head with that haughty air of contempt, which is now so rarely seen, except in our tyrants on the stage.
A string of interrogatories, somewhat in the inquisitorial stile, were the first salutations Henry received from the noble personage; his answers to these, though not always satisfactory to the point of information, were respectfully and modestly conveyed.—"I find," resumed his Lordship, "you are here without occupation or employ, idling about my parish, consorting with a young woman, the daughter of one of the cottagers, caballing with the rabble of the village, and stirring them up to very infamous attacks upon a respectable magistrate, my friend and neighbour; and therefore I wou'd have you know, that I shall consider you as a person of a very suspicious character, and pass you off as a vagrant, unless you instantly decamp."


"My lord," replied the youth, "if I offend against the laws of my country, by being poor and without employ, I must patiently submit to all the consequences I may incur by your enforcing them against me; but if I have committed no offence, have behav'd myself peaceably,

and in one instance, suffer me to say, profitably to an individual of your lordship's parish, I am at a loss to think how I can be represented to you as a dangerous and suspected character: nevertheless, if my abiding any longer on your lordship's soil may give you offence, I shall not oppose myself to your displeasure, but depart."


"Do so then without delay," said the Peer, "and begone; but first tell me what charities you have receiv'd from my wife, for what services, and to what amount."—"My lord, I have done no services to Lady Crowbery, nor am at liberty to answer to the other points, on which you question me."


"What, Sir! do you receive money from my wife, and refuse to satisfy me, when I demand how much?"


"I am very sorry to be obliged to decline any thing your lordship wishes to be informed of from me, but in this instance I must desire to be excused."


"You have been cautioned, I perceive; but do you affect honour?"


"That requires no answer, my lord."


"Why, in truth the question is rather superfluous."



"I treat it as such, for honour is as inherent in my person as it is hereditary in your lordship's: I do not therefore take your lordship's words as conveying any doubt of my preserving that part at least of my natural character, which misfortune cannot rob me of, and which, permit me to add, does not suffer me to put up with a determin'd insult from any man."


"Upon my word, Sir!" replied Lord Crowbery, somewhat relaxing from the stateliness of his manner, and the acrimony of his tone, "you talk a high language considering what you are; and I believe it was somewhat in this stile that you deported yourself with Mr. Blachford."—"Pardon me, my lord, it was in a very different manner I found myself compelled to address Mr. Blachford: he had defamed the character of a young woman, whom he took the basest means to seduce, and as he had falsely charg'd me with the very crime he himself had attempted to commit, I simply told him, that his attack on Susan May was infamous, and his report of me an impudent and abominable lie. That gentleman, I dare say, very distinctly heard the words; if not, I am very ready to repeat them."


"Not in my hearing; I desire no such familiarity;

nor do I wish to be made a party in Mr. Blachford's quarrels."


"Your lordship will be pleased to recollect that you stated my behaviour to that gentleman as matter of charge: in my own vindication therefore I was led to tell you of what sort his behaviour was to me; and in accounting for my words found it necessary to explain the causes that provok'd them. I trust your lordship thinks I have not failed in my respect to you by answering in my own defence."


"You have no right over my thoughts; them I shall keep to myself: there are deeper thoughts in my mind than I shall see fit at present to produce."


"Then, my lord, I am to presume you never will produce them, against me at least; for I am here present on your own summons, standing before you like a culprit at the bar, to hear and to answer every thing you can urge against me; I therefore humbly beg leave to know from yourself whether I am clear of all you have to charge me with."—"I have nothing more to say to you, Sir," replied my my Lord; "you may retire when you please."—"I understand you, my lord," cried Henry; "you have restored to me my character, and

I will take care so to guard it that no man shall traduce it with impunity."



CHAPTER XI. A Blow well placed in the Dark, or, in other Words, according to the Greek Proverb, Blachford shears a Lion.
AS Henry passed through the hall, after his conference related in the foregoing chapter, he was met by Lady Crowbery, who hastily put a paquet into his hand, conjuring him to take care of it, and keep secret the contents.—"In that paper," she said, "you will see the mystery of your birth reveal'd: Betake yourself to my uncle Manstock without delay, and Heaven in its mercy protect and guard you!"

Henry, almost overpowered with joyful surprize, at hearing what that paper was to disclose, took it with all the rapture and devotion, which its interesting contents excited, and carefully secured it in his pocket. He had yet sufficient recollection left to seize the oppornity for returning the ring to Lady Crowbery wrapped up in paper and tied; at the same

time he briefly recited what had been said to him by the man who found it: Lady Crowbery seemed a good deal surprized, and denied having missed any one of her rings, however as the time was pressing, and the danger of being discovered instant, she took it from him, and again bidding him tenderly farewell, hastened away.
There were two roads to the village; the shortest by a foot-path through the plantation, which was close and now dark, the other was the common coach-road through the park, open and secure from ambuscade. As Henry came out from the hall-door, he found old Weevil the miller waiting in the court-yard: he had been to the house with flour, and had been chatting as usual with the servants; he understood from them, that Henry was under examination with my lord, and having noticed O'Rourke prowling about the plantations with, his bludgeon in his hand, entertained some suspicions of a plot upon Henry, and was determined to accompany him home, and persuaded him to take the open road through the park.
This was a task of some difficulty on the part of the friendly miller, for Henry's eagerness

to open the important pacquet made him very adverse to any proposal that prolonged the time; the point, however, was carried, and he, accompanied by Weevil, arrived safe at the widow's, whilst Larry O'Rourke laid close in his ambush at the bottom of the grove, where was a little foot-bridge that led over a narrow stream, thickly shaded with alders.
When a much longer period of time had elapsed than would have served to carry Henry through the grove, Blachford, who calculated minutes, with some anxiety, set out from the Viscounts upon the scout, and took his way secretly and solitarily down the plantation-walk: as he approached the spot where the attack was to be made, he stopt and listened; all was silence: he took counsel with his own thoughts, and concluding the business was done, advanced, nothing doubting, till he had one foot upon the bridge, when, as if fortune had in that instant recovered her eye-sight and bestowed the bludgeon with strict retaliation upon its proper owner, Larry O'Rourke, supposing he had now made sure of his victim, took aim with such success, and dealt his blow with so hearty a good-will upon the pericranium

of the magistrate, that Blachford, having uttered one horrid yell as his heels flew from under him, instantly paid his compliments to the muddy naiads of the brook.
The George and Dragon alehouse, where the party was carousing, who had performed the ceremony of the gibbet, was so near to the scene of action, that Blachford's yell was most distinctly heard by the persons there assembled, who immediately turned out upon the alarm. Amongst the first of these was John Jenkins the hangman, who found Larry O'Rourke employed in dragging the justice out of the water, for he had now, though somewhat of the latest, discovered a small mistake as to heads, but in point of execution no fault could be found with his work, which seemed to be effectually done, as the blow had taken place just above the temple, and the bludgeon was loaded with lead. John Jenkins being somewhat more than elevated with his evening's festivity, was for leaving the justice to his fate, making use of the trite proverb, that the man who was born to be hanged, was in no danger of being drowned; but the soberer part of the company, who

saw further into the case than John did, lent their hands to the work, and assisted in dragging Blachford out of the brook, who during the whole operation observed a perfect silence, which we are far from imputing to any sullenness on the part of that gentleman, he being at that time from home upon a temporary trip to the regions of insensibility.
One of the company had been dispatched for a candle and lantern, and by the light of this the body of Justice Blachford, stretched upon the ground and motionless, exhibited a most ghastly spectacle; his temple streaming with blood, his eyes fixed, and no symptom of life appearing. Upon the sight of this, Larry O'Rourke set up a most dolorous howl in the true Connaught key and cadence, crying out.—"Ullaloo! Master, why wou'd you die? Had'nt you horses and cows and cattle in abundance, with plenty of strong drink in your vaults, and store of money in your lockers, and why wou'd you leave poor Larry to lament and cry over you at such a rate, when you might have been easy and quiet at home, and no harm done? Ah! was'nt it a foul step of your's to thrust your head in the

way of my cudgel, when you knew well enough, aye and wou'd witness it too, if the grace of God was'nt just now out of your memory, that if every one had his own, that big knock on the head you have got is another man's property, only he chanc'd to be out of the way when I gave it to him."


"Seize the murderer," cried one of the troop, upon which John Jenkins and the rest laid hold of him.—"What is it you are upon, ye pagans," exclaimed Larry, "to be seizing me? Let the dead man speak for himself, and mark if he don't tell you another story about the matter, whereby it was no murder, only a small mistake, and if that's a hanging matter, woe beside my countrymen! Ask him now, ye sparrow-hawks, if it was'nt at his own desire that I kill'd him, and how shou'd I know one man from another in the dark, when I cou'd see neither?"

Somebody now cried out to hold him fast, for it was confessedly a plot between master and man to have assassinated Henry.—"To be sure it was," said O'Rourke; "Do you think I'm such a graceless teif as to kill my own master? Huh! you are a cunning one, are you not, to find out that?"


Three or four of them now began to hale the Irishman away with them, whilst others fetched a blanket from the alehouse, on which they laid the body of Blachford, and in this manner carried him to his own house.

END OF BOOK THE FOURTH.



BOOK THE FIFTH.

CHAPTER I. A short Treatise upon Love, antient and modern.
LOVE, as a deity, was invested, by those who made him such, with the most contradictory attributes: they feigned him blind, yet called him an unerring marksman; gave him wings, yet allowed that constancy was his best qualification; described him as an infant, yet were not to learn that infancy alone is exempted from his power.
These are contrarieties, which none but the initiated can reconcile. They justify his blindness, when hurried on by the impetuosity of passion they espy no danger in the precipice before them; they acknowledge he is swift of wing, when the minutes they devote to his enjoyments fly so quickly, and they cannot but regard him as an infant, when one short honeymoon begins and terminates his date of life.
A thousand ingenious devices have been formed to suit the various properties of this fabulous

divinity, and every symbol has it's moral; he has been allegorized and enigmatized in innumerable ways; the pen, the pencil and the chissel have been worn out in his service; floods of ink, looms of canvass, and quarries of marble, have been exhausted in the boundless field of figurative description. The lover, who finds out so many ways of torturing himself, cannot fail to strike out symbols and devices to express the passion under which he suffers; then the verse flows mournfully elegiac, and the bleeding heart, transfixed with an arrow, is emblematically displayed; thus, whilst the poet varies his measure, the painter and the sculptor vary their devices, as joy or sorrow, success or disappointment, influence their fancy. One man's Cupid is set astride upon a lion, to exemplify his power; another places his upon a crocodile, to satyrize his hypocrisy; here the god is made to trample upon kingly crowns, there to trifle with a wanton sparrow; the adamantine rock now crumbles at his stroke, anon we see him basking on the bosom of Chloe, his arrows broken and his pinions bound.
The Greeks, who had more caprice in their passions than either nature or morality can excuse, nevertheless bequeathed their Cupid to

posterity with a considerable stock in hand; but the moderns added more from funds of their own, and every thing they bestowed was honestly appropriated to the only sex that has any claim upon the regular and solid firme of Venus, Cupid, and Co.

When superstition met its final overthrow, and the heathen temples were dismantled of their images and altars, Love alone, the youngest of the deities, survived the disaster, and still holds his dignities and prerogatives by christian courtesy; and though modern ingenuity has not added much to his embellishments, yet, in the ardour and sincerity of our devotion, we do not yield to the antients: the whole region of romance has been made over to him; our drama, tragic as well as comic, has gone far beyond that of the antients in building its fable and character upon the passion of love. Last in point of time, but not of allegiance, comes the fraternity of novelists, who are his clients to a man; Love is the essence of every tale, and so studious are our authors not to let the spirit of that essence become vapid, that few, if any, fail to conclude with the event of marriage: connubial love is of a quality too tame for their purpose.

As the majority of our novels are formed upon domestic plots, and most of these drawn from the very times in which they are written, the living manners must be charactered by the authors of such fables, and we must of course make our Love of such materials as the fashion of the age affords: it will not therefore resemble the high-flown passion of the Gothic knights and heroes of the old romance, neither will it partake of those coarse manners and expressions, which our old comic writers adopt; it will even take a different shade from what a novelist would have given it half a century ago, for the social commerce of the sexes is now so very different from what it was then, that beauty is no longer worshipped with that distant respect, which our antiquated beaux paid to their mistresses.
As the modern fine gentleman studies nothing but his ease, and aims only to be what he terms comfortable, regarding all those things, that used to be considered as annoyances and embarrassments, with cool indifference and contempt, even Love in him is not an active passion; he expresses no raptures at the sight of beauty, and if he is haply provoked to some slight exertion out of course, it must be some

new face just launched upon the public, that can fan his languid spirit into any emotion approaching towards curiosity. Nothing is an object of admiration with him; he covets no gratifications that are to be earned by labour, no favours that are to be extorted by assiduity; his pleasures must court him, and the fair one he affects must forget that she is a divinity, and banish from her thoughts the accustomed homage of sighs and tears and bending knees, for all these things give trouble to the performer, and on that account are by general consent exploded and abolished.
Now the writer of novels has not the privilege, which the painter of portraits has, of dressing modern characters in antique habits; so that some of our best productions in this class are already become, in some particulars, out of fashion; even the inimitable composition of The Foundling is fading away in some of it's tints, though the hand of the master as a correct delineator of nature will be traced to all posterity, and hold it's rank amongst the foremost of that class, which enrols the names of Cervantes, Rabelais, Le Sage, Voltaire, Rousseau, Richardson, Smollet, Johnson, Sterne, and some others, whose pens death

hath not yet stopt, and long may it be ere he does!
Having now allowed the historic muse her customary bait, we shall soon urge her to fresh exertions, by which a certain young lady, who as yet has barely stept upon the stage, will begin to support a more important interest in the business of this drama. Isabella Manstock, in the bloom of youth and beauty, cannot long remain an idle character; though she has flattered herself that filial affection will keep possession of her heart, to the exclusion of that intruding passion we have been speaking of, yet nature and experience will compel me to exhibit that lovely recusant as one amongst many, who have been fain to truckle to the tyrant they abjure: the time is drawing near, when impressions, which she never felt before, will force their way; when the merits, the misfortunes, the attentions of our hero, will take hold upon her heart; when her eye will dwell upon his person with delight, her ear listen to his praises with rapture, to his sighs with pity, to his suit with favour: then if Love, who is not to be affronted with impunity, gives a loose to his revenge, and makes her feel the full terrors of his power, the reader will be pleased to bear

in mind, that I have not taken my lovers from the inanimate groups that form the circle of fashion, but sought them in the sequestered walks of rural life, where the senses are not deadened by variety, nor indifference become habitual by the affectation of it.


CHAPTER II. A Letter spares a Blush.
WHEN Henry entered the cottage, and found it cleared of it's inhabitants, who had joined the crowd that was collected about the wounded body of the justice, his heart palpitated with eager, yet anxious, curiosity, as he unfolded the interesting pacquet which Lady Crowbery had given him, and therein read as follows:

Nature forces from me the important secret; my heart can no longer suppress it's struggles: I am your mother. A victim to love, before reason or experience had armed me against that dangerous passion, I yielded to a fatal proposal of escaping with my lover to Scotland from my father, who inexorably opposed our marriage. Made desperate by that cruel interdiction, we set

out upon our rash adventure; were closely pursued, and, in the last stage of our journey, overtaken. When we found ourselves cut off from any further progress, despair seized us, but it was the despair of lovers, resolute to sacrifice every thing rather than their fidelity and plighted faith.
In this forlorn and hopeless moment, love, importunity, the interchange of mutual vows and promises, and, above all, the visionary hope that so we might compel my father to unite us, tempted us to seal our contract without the ceremony that was needful to confirm and sanctify it.
I own the rashness of the deed, nor aim to palliate it's culpability; I prostrated myself at my father's feet, confessed my weakness, implored his pity and forgiveness, and, in an agony of grief, besought him to consent to join our hands, and save me from the shame and misery that would else befall me. 'Twas in vain; we were torn asunder; a noble youth, unexceptionable in birth and character, the younger son of the Lord Pendennis, was discarded; he went upon his adventures to India; I remained disconsolate, and in ignorance of his fate, till in the

course of time I was, in secrecy, delivered of a son.
That son you are: Henry Delapoer, if he lives, is your father.
For the love of heaven keep this secret buried from the world, till—but I can no more; the meltings of a mother's heart forbid the rest.

The mystery thus revealed, Henry awhile stood fixt in dumb surprize; the first emotions of his heart burst into unpremeditated prayer and pious thanks to God. Clasping the paper in his hands, with bended knees and eyes uplifted, in the fervour of his soul, he broke forth—"I thank thee, Father of all mercies, that thou hast now vouchsafed to take thy humble creature out of darkness into light, conducting me through various chances by thy all-gracious providence, and giving me at length to know what nature languished for in vain, the mystery of my birth. And, O my God, though I were born in guilt, yet sanctify me; though the child of disobedience, with my whole heart I'll serve thee; so shall I gain in heaven what I have forfeited on earth, a name and an inheritance."




CHAPTER III. Some Folks are no nice Discerners of Times and Seasons.
A Few minutes only had passed, whilst Henry was endeavouring to compose his agitated spirits, when behold! Ezekiel, followed by the women, returned to the cottage, full fraught with texts of holy writ applicable to the scene he had been present at, and which he was so impatient to discharge, that how to find room for them all, and what order to bring them out in, seemed to be the only thing that puzzled him; and though the hour was drawing towards bed-time, preach he must, and Henry must hear him, though any other person but Ezekiel could not have failed to notice the distraction of his thoughts; but times and seasons never were a part of that good man's studies, neither was he one who thought there could be too much of a good thing; and the best of all possible things, in his opinion, was his own preaching.

"The wicked is trapped in his own snare," quoth Ezekiel; "this is one of the proverbs of Solomon, and Solomon, my children, was

a wise man, the wisest man in all the world, every school-boy can tell you that: he was king of Israel; it is not all kings are as wise as Solomon; put down all they ever said in a book of proverbs, and one chapter, nay one single sentence of his shall be worth them all; and he spake three thousand proverbs, his songs were a thousand and five; he could entertain the Queen of Sheba with something worth her notice, when she came to prove him with hard questions; I cannot tell you where Sheba was, I wish I could, but I know it was somewhere in the south, and that she travell'd out of a far country to hear his wisdom; now you can hear it and not move out of your chairs, and yet you cry out 'tis bed-time, yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep. A terrible judgment hath lighted on this wicked Blachford, the cry of the widow is gone up against him, the persecutor of the innocent man hath fallen by the hand of his own accomplice: If they say, come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause, behold they lay wait for their own blood, they lurk privily for their own lives."

Scarce had Ezekiel brought this sentence to

a close, when the unexpected appearance of Doctor Zachary Cawdle cut him short.—"May I believe my eyes?" exclaimed Henry.—"Here I am sure enough," replied Zachary, "and no ghost, rather too fat for that still, though a good span in the girdle less than I was; but venienti occurrere morbo is my maxim, you understand me, brother Daw: if I had not play'd the doctor with the devil, he wou'd have played the devil with the doctor, I can tell you; but I have parried him for this turn."—Ezekiel groaned.—"Here's been fine doings amongst you; there's one head in the parish, that I wou'd not have on my shoulders for all the money that belongs to it. Zooks and blood! my old Sawney wou'd have made a posset of the Justice's brains, had'nt I stept in at the nick."—"Is the wound dangerous," quoth Ezekiel, after another groan.—"Dangerous!" replied Zachary, "tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church-door, but it will do: many an honest man has walk'd out of the world, and not so good an apology for taking leave of it, as Master Blachford has, believe me, brother Doctor. My Sawney prognosticated he would do well, because forsooth he slept so quietly; blockhead, quoth I, the somnolency augurs injury to the brain by fracture,

or concussion, or depression of the scull; and sure enough I found it so, a damnable squat upon the occiput;—Good night to you, thought I, your nap will be a long one."—("Alas, alas!" murmur'd Ezekiel) "I believe, brother surgeon, we must apply the trepan, we must break a way into his small cargo of brains."—"Mercy upon me," quoth Ezekiel, "the man will die."—"Most men will do that," said Zachary, "and he perhaps as soon as most."—"But he's not fit to die," reiterated the preacher.—"I've long thought," rejoined the doctor, "he was not fit to live."—"Is he in his senses," Ezekiel ask'd—"If he is," quoth Zachary, "he keeps them to himself."—"How then shall he be warned of his approaching end?"—"Methinks he is pretty well warn'd of that," replied the doctor; "if you had such a crack on your skull, you wou'd find one warning full sufficient."—"But I mean," cried Ezekiel, exalting his voice and rearing himself up into the perpendicular, "who is to awaken him to a recollection of his sinful life, to call him to repentance, and prepare his poor departing soul for eternity?"—"That's another matter," replied the man of medicine, "that's a business out of my way altogether."—Yet

give me leave to say," resumed the preacher, "tis a business that imports him highly, 'tis that which he, and you and I, and every mortal breathing must take seriously in hand: he is the artist that can heal those wounds, he the best friend that can assuage those pangs, and find a balm to allay the rage of a tormented conscience."

This was one of the last subjects Zachary wished to talk upon, yet so it happened, that Ezekiel seldom failed to start it in his company; to turn it off therefore for the present, Zachary observed, that death to be sure was a serious thing to every man, but that was no reason we should be always talking about it; 'twou'd come soon enough of its own accord: "For my part," continued he, "I hold it good to keep up the spirits of my patients, and do my best to drive such gloomy thoughts away from them; whereas, whenever one of your sort comes about them preaching and praying, I constantly observe they sink and pine away, the pulse grows low and feeble; tremors seize them, and symptoms, which before were only menacing, thenceforward become mortal: therefore do you see, friend Daw, you and I directly counteract each other,

for whilst I am bracing you are relaxing, and I wou'd as soon administer cathartics to my patient in a putrid case, as bring you to his bedside to sound the death-watch in his ear. Leave the justice then to me, I beseech you, and when I have mended his head, if ever that shall be, it will be time enough and task enough for you to mend his heart."

Zachary concluded in time, for Ezekiel's tongue wou'd not have been restricted to silence any longer; as there was something in this harangue which touched him in the tenderest part, and as the good man was always ready armed for religious controversy, he was just stepping into the lists, when he saw the person of the doctor vanish at the door with hat and cane in hand, not waiting for a rejoinder, which was likely to be so little to his taste.

"Aha!" cried Ezekiel, "let him go for an obstinate despiser of things sacred. Is that man, who carries a tub full of mortality before him, a proper champion to set death and repentance at defiance? But mark the valour of this boastful challenger; he throws down his gage, and then runs away from the combat. Oh! if he had but stay'd to hear me; I

wou'd have made his ears tingle with my answer; like a two-edged sword, the word of truth shou'd have pierc'd that belly-full of wickedness to the dividing of the marrow; I wou'd have told him."—Here Ezekiel recollected so many things that he would have told, and new matter flowed in so fast whilst he was working out the old, that if Henry's patience could have reached the length of Ezekiel's sermon, the best example of this virtue would not have been that of holy Job.
All things, however, come to an end, and even Ezekiel's preaching did not last for ever, so that our hero was at length left to his repose, or I should rather have said to those interesting meditations, which occupied his mind too fully to admit of sleep. The important paquet was again resorted to; the discovery therein contained, gave him a name and station in society; new duties, new sensations now commenced; now he discerned the pure maternal source, from whence those tender transports were derived, that had occasioned his alarm, and roused the jealous rage of Lord Crowbery; but he saw with infinite regret, that circumstances, justified by nature, never

could be explained, and how to rescue his unhappy parent from her danger he knew not: ardently he longed to throw himself at her feet and receive her blessing, but all approaches were barred against him; no choice was left but to resort for protection to the hospitable house of Sir Roger Manstock, and he now regarded him not only as the friend of Ratcliffe, but as the uncle of his mother; a consideration that greatly relieved him from many of his scruples; a sum in bank notes, which was inclosed within the cover of his mother's letter, very amply furnished him with an independence as to money matters, a favor of all others the most painful to solicit from any benefactor but a parent. He resolved therefore to set out for Manstock-house with the return of morning, and it is no improbable conjecture, that in forming this resolution, ideas of a certain sort, not absolutely devoid of hope, nor far removed from the first dawnings of a tender passion, had a share in his decisions; certain it is, that he had little courage for the undertaking in his former humble obscurity, though the invitation had been held out to him by the worthy Baronet in the most gracious manner.

At length the morning dawned, when the sound of voices under his window occasioned him to open the casement and enquire into the cause of it. Two or three peasants, who had taken the body of Larry O'Rourke in charge, had missed their prisoner, and were reproaching each other with what seemed to have been the joint neglect of all, for they had contented themselves with shutting him into an upper chamber in the alehouse, whilst they regaled themselves in the kitchen: the points they had now in debate were, first, how it was possible for him to escape; next, whose fault it was that he did escape; and lastly, whether it was worth their while to pursue him; this however was soon decided in the negative, as one of the company assured them that the law would give them no reward for apprehending him, and all parties instantly agreed that there was nothing to be got by running after him. In this conclusion all were of a mind, and the business ended in their separating on the spot, and severally returning quietly to their own homes.



CHAPTER IV. A new Scene opens upon our Hero.
WITH the break of day Henry left his pallet, and Susan at the same time shook off the soft bands of sleep, and presented to the eyes of morning a figure worthy to enlist amongst the Hours, that dance before the chariot of Apollo. When she had packed up her wardrobe, and arrayed her person in the simple dress of snow-white callico, she was prepared to obey the promised summons from her young mistress at Manstock-house.
Our hero in the mean time had accoutered himself to the best advantage: though the effects of a sleepless night were discoverable in his eyes and complexion, his model was such as academies might rejoice in, and theatres applaud; the child of love, offspring of parents in the prime of youth and bloom of beauty, he inherited all his mother's sweetness, and his father's fire; whilst nature and education had united to repay him for those penalties, which the law had laid upon his birth.
The old Dame and Ezekiel had not yet made their appearance. Susan entered the

room, where he was sitting wrapt in meditation; her eyes met his, she sighed, blushed, and retired: nothing was said, and we do not presume to dive into the thoughts and emotions of the heart.
After a few minutes Ezekiel Daw descended from his loft; his air and step had more than usual solemnity, and his countenance was expressive of a tender melancholy; his voice, naturally sharp and acrimonious, was now pitched in its softest and lowest key, when he addressed himself to our hero in the following terms:

"I perceive, my beloved child, thou art about to depart from us. I have remember'd thee in my morning exercises, and put up my petitions to the throne of grace for blessing and protection to thee in thy future pilgrimage through this world of woe. Verily, my good child, I do love thee as a father loveth his own son; and if it were thy destiny, amidst the gross temptations of a sinful age, to fall from virtue, and a state of grace, I wou'd ask of Heaven to smite me now with death, rather than let me live to know and to lament thy soul's sad forfeiture of happiness to come. But I will hope thou art not in the way of

such perdition; Heaven forbid! And now I pray thee, hearken to me awhile: I have liv'd longer in the world, and know it better, than thou possibly canst, who hast such short experience of it: mark me therefore! Thou art adventuring forth upon the word of promise given to thee by the Lady Crowbery; 'tis well! I do agnize good dispositions in the Lady Crowbery, she is a bounteous lady, but she is a woman; and of that sex I draw my caution from the book of books, yea verily I take them on the word of the wisest of men, for what he found them to be to his cost: Yes, grace of God! young man, I studied them betimes; never took fire into my bosom, as the preacher hath it; never lusted after her beauty, neither let her take me with her eyelids; therefore thou seest I have good right to say I know them well; and though I shou'd be loth to misinterpret the fair-seeming acts of any one, yet seeing thou art comely in thine outward man, and goodly to look at, being withal in that prurient state of early youth, which is most apt to lure the wandering eyes of woman, I warn thee not to run into a snare. What art thou to the Lady Crowbery?—a stranger; wert thou her son, cou'd she do more? Great favours

granted without cause to comely men, and outward decking of the person, as thine now is, my child, rather betokens love, and amorous desire, than true and perfect charity: The Lady Crowbery, I say, is but a woman."


"I grant you," replied Henry, "she is a woman, but such an one as never must be mentioned in my hearing but with reverence."—"Enough said!" cried Ezekiel, "enough said, young man, I have done! Take your own course; good luck go with you! proffer'd advice, they say, has a bad savour with it: there is a certain animal, (I name no names) which, if you throw a pearl to him, will turn and rend you. I'll not strive to make a cap of grey hairs for a green head. You are wise, I warrant me; you are all-sufficient; I am an ape, an ass, a ninny; I have not studied women, I know nothing of their tricks, their whims, their fancies, not I. Well, well, I've done, I say I've done; and so good bye to you."

This said, he turned away; when Henry, catching hold of the skirt of his coat, cried out, "Stop, my good friend, let us not part in anger."—"Let go!" replied Ezekiel, "beware you rend not my vesture; what wou'dest thou, intemperate boy?"—"I wou'd not hurt you

for the world."—"Then loose your hold upon my vesture."—"I wou'd not, by the soul of me, I wou'd not anger you."—"Anger me!" cried the preacher, "when did'st thou see me angry? when did I ever yield to wrath, or vent one hasty word? Never; I know myself too well: thou dost mistake, rash youth, to call me angry; 'tis thou thyself that art in wrath; I'm calm as water."


"If I am angry, then, forgive me," said Henry; "if I am a rash youth, pity me, for, by my soul"—"No more of that," interpos'd the preacher, "thou hast us'd that strong asseveration twice, thou hast twice pledg'd that sacred part of thee already in a slight trivial matter; perhaps I can believe thee, though thou dost not stake thy immortality upon the assertion."—"Without a pledge, then," rejoined the youth, "I tell you, in plain honesty and truth, that your advice, however well-intention'd, and, in other cases, good, in this of Lady Crowbery is misapplied; and, did you know with what my heart is charg'd, you wou'd not wonder at this start of passion and impatience: bear with me then, and do not doubt but I know how to value both your counsel and your friendship."



"Well, well, well!" replied the worthy creature, "here is my hand; you see your fault, and there's an end of it; but never think that I can be surpriz'd by the unruly passion of anger: No, no, thank Heaven, no man can ever throw that stone at me. And now, my dear child, as I am a sinner, I cou'd almost think that thou hadst drugg'd me with some potion, so much I love thee; and when thou dost leave me, Henry, 'twill almost break my heart; but what of that? Fortune calls thee hence; go, never think of me; for by my soul I swear"—Here a smile on Henry's countenance brought the good man to sudden recollection—"What was I about to say?" he cried; "Oh! this it was: my soul is in that state of readiness for misfortune, pain, adversity, nay, death itself, that, as to any thing that can befall myself, I am perfectly indifferent; but I shou'd indeed be wretched, my dear child, if any evil chance betided thee."

Here the conversation ended with a very affectionate reply from Henry, in return for this kind speech; and, not long after, a servant arrived from Sir Roger Manstock's, in a one-horse chair, for the conveyance of Susan and the baggage, and at the same time a groom with a led horse for Henry.

After a ride of about twelve miles through a fertile and pleasant country, our hero came in sight of Manstock-house, the antient seat of that respectable family, which through many generations had preserved it in it's original character without alteration or derangement: the same venerable avenues, the same walled gardens and formal parterres, held their stations around it; it's turrets were untouched, it's windows had not felt the hand of modern art, and the parish church still kept it's post of a close and faithful centinel over the morals of the family. The village spread itself to the north and west, and in the opposite quarter an inlet of the sea, at about a mile's distance, bounded a park well furnished with groupes of stately timber-trees; the fields and pastures about the village shewed themselves in a state of high cultivation, whilst several farm-houses in detached situations added greatly to the life and beauty of the landscape.
Henry had stopt upon the height to contemplate this animated prospect, and whilst he was thus employed, the venerable Baronet and his fair daughter joined him on horseback. Sir Roger was not a man of many words, neither did he excel in the modern fashion of address,

but he had a stile of welcoming his guests, that expressed his own sincerity, and put them effectually at their ease: his reception of our young adventurer was peculiarly cordial; it told him in few words that the heart of the owner was like the house, open, large, hospitable, and old-fashioned. Susan was sent home in the chair by the shortest road, whilst Henry, at his own request, was permitted to accompany the party on horseback in their circuit through the grounds, which, after a very pleasant tour, brought them to the village: here they stopt at a neat little mansion, which seemed newly repaired, and had a piece of ground at the back of it laid out as a garden, and well cropt with useful vegetables.

"This little tenement," said Sir Roger, "belongs to Isabella, and she is mistress of the works here carrying on; therefore I believe we must pay our court to her by dismounting from our horses, and taking a view of her performances."—Upon the word, Henry leapt from the saddle, and presented himself at the lady's stirrup, who accepted of his assistance.—"I propose," said she, "with my father's leave, to put Susan's mother into this cottage: what is your opinion of it? Perhaps she will

not find herself so comfortable here as in that she is accustom'd to, but I flatter myself she will be more mercifully treated."—"'Tis a little paradise," cried Henry, as he looked about him; "and, if I could contemplate her happiness with envy, it would be for living in such a place, and under such a patroness."

It was truly a most enviable little mansion, in which the generous care of the fair owner had provided against every want, that its destined inhabitants could be supposed to have: upon the ground-floor, besides a kitchen stocked with every necessary, there was a sitting-room neatly papered, and beyond that a small office fitted up with shelves, which, Isabella observed, would serve the good dame as her shop of medicines. Over the chimney in the sitting-room Isabella had hung a print, which not only bore the name, but also a very strong likeness, of her father. When Henry had contemplated this print for some moments, he turned his eyes upon Isabella, as if he was searching for a resemblance in her features: some tender sentiment at that moment had called the tears into her eyes; Henry caught it by the swiftest glance that delicacy permitted him to indulge—swift as it was, it offered up

her whole heart to his view, where filial affection, amidst a thousand tender sensibilities, held pre-eminence; the sympathetic impulse was communicated in an instant; the intelligence of kindred souls is quick as thought itself: in spite of his address the glance had passed and repassed, that carried with it the reciprocal sensation of two feeling hearts: nothing was said, but all was understood; souls can confer without the noisy vehicle of words.—Sir Roger Manstock was at this time talking with a labourer in the garden.

"I must shew you the chambers on the upper floor," said Isabella. Henry followed her in silence: the stairs were steep; he forgot himself, and let her lead the way: he suffered for his oversight as such forgetfulness deserved; his heart was doomed to encounter an emotion of another sort from that he had so lately felt. Ill-fated youth! are all Ezekiel's precepts so soon forgotten? He would have told thee there is danger in every atom of a beautiful damsel, from the crown of her head even to the taper extremities of those elegant limbs, which thine unguarded eye took in. Thoughtless, devoted victim! whither art thou climbing? Thou dost but follow to inevitable

sacrifice: thy fate precedes thee, and trains thee up a precipice, from whence it is decreed that thou must fall.
At length they have reached the summit of their ascent: a door on each side opened to a bed-chamber, which seemed to say that here benevolence had provided an asylum for the repose of peace. The simplicity here displayed, which Horace in two happy words describes, I could not convey in twenty; it was elegance, that modest poverty would not blush to avow; it was taste so void of ornament that the disposer's excellence consisted in the concealment of her art.—"You see," cried Isabella, "I have provided for the good man, who lodges with the widow; if he comes," added she, pointing to the bed, "there is rest from his labours."

Henry took notice that Ezekiel's chamber was provided with a small nest of shelves for books; neither did it escape him that Isabella had conveyed a compliment to his charity by adorning his chimney with a print of the good Samaritan. In the chamber of Dame May she had hung a print also, which represented the story of the widow of Zarephath and the prophet Elijah. These, with many other circumstances

in the accommodations of the house, shewed him how thoroughly Isabella possessed the happy quality of doubling her favours by the grace of bestowing them.
They now remounted their horses and proceeded to the mansion. To Henry, who had all his life been accustomed to the small and private scale of a country clergyman's establishment, this was a new and curious scene; as they passed through a Gothic gateway into the front court, a venerable personage, dressed in a tufted gown, and holding a silver-headed staff in his hand, presented himself to the wondering sight of our hero; at the same time a bell was tolled in the turret, which gave solemn notice of their approach, and summoned the domestics to their posts in the great hall: here, according to the fashion of old times, the Baronet took Henry by the hand and welcom'd him to Manstock-house. Scenes, that he had only read of in description, were now present to his view; every thing within the house perfectly corresponded with the stile and character of the exterior: walls built for perpetuity, rooms calculated for feudal hospitality, and space wantonly lavished without regard to oeconomy or convenience, bespoke the rude magnificence

of the founder; the very servants seemed in age and habit of another century. The hall was hung round with banners and trophies of various sorts, both of war and of the chace: over an immense span of fire-place was displayed the family shield, containing a vast number of bearings properly illuminated and arranged according to the rules of heraldry, and at the upper end the portrait of an old man at full length in a black habit, with the ensigns of the garter and the blue ribbon hanging in a point from his neck, holding a scroll in his hand, on which was traced the ground plot of the house, and bespoke him to be the founder of it.
Sir Roger Manstock's family consisted of one only daughter; he had lost his lady about three years past. Isabella, the darling of her father, had now entered her eighteenth year, and since her mother's death had constantly resided with him, and of late had taken the post and presidency of mistress of the family. With a table always open to his friends and neighbours, Sir Roger passed his time in a constant residence at Manstock-house, in the center of a very noble property, beloved by all that knew him, and doing good to all

that depended on him. When his friends solicited him to stand forth as county member, telling him that all parties would join in electing him, his constant answer was, that he thanked them for their good opinion, but his utmost ambition was to live amongst them, fulfilling to the best of his capacity the duties of an acting magistrate and a plain country gentleman; in which station he humbly conceived he should serve them better, and approve himself a more useful member of the community, than by attending upon parliament, for which he modestly, and perhaps truly, asserted that he had no talents.


CHAPTER V. The Coward out of Doors is a Lion in his own House.
HAVING now so happily disposed of our hero for a while, we are at leisure to look back to the state of affairs at Crowbery Castle, where the misadventure of Justice Blachford had made no slight impression. The Captain, who had laid his plan of the press-gang,

as we have related, was now deterred from putting it to the experiment, not only by the shameful catastrophe of Blachford's murderous plot, but also by the consideration of Sir Roger Manstock's having taken Henry into his protection. Blachford's case was still extremely doubtful; he seemed to be dosing away his life, with few and short intervals of faint and imperfect sensibility; the scull was evidently fractured, and Zachary had pronounced upon the trepan as indispensable: it had been thought proper, however, to call in the assistance of a London surgeon, and his arrival was hourly expected. Nobody doubted his being the victim of his own plot; but O'Rourke, who probably would have brought it home to him in his own defence, had escaped from the people who apprehended him, and was far enough out of reach; nobody stirred in his pursuit, and the few persons, who were interested to conceal the evidence of Blachford's criminality, were much more likely to assist his flight than to stop it. To leave the matter mysterious, or rather to aim at making it so, was the most they could hope for: to cast suspicion upon Henry was out of their power, no chicanery could do that against the

joint force of so many witnesses, who cou'd depose to the very words that O'Rourke had uttered, when he confessed that what he had done was by his master's orders, only that he had mistaken the person upon whom they were to have been executed; and this account, in which they perfectly agreed, was circulated over all the neighbourhood. In the mean time old Weevil the miller, who had been eventually the preserver of Henry's life, by persuading him to return with him through the park, was not idle in publishing his account of the affair, and the motives that induced him fortunately to advise as he did. Blachford, therefore, whether living or dying, was effectually ruined in reputation, and so universally execrated as the vilest of wretches, that even the Viscount himself, and his satellites the lawyer and the captain, were fain to disavow him. Still the heart of the proud peer rankled with rage and jealousy: disappointed of the revenge he had promised himself to enjoy through the means of others, and intimidated from taking any open measures of his own against the object of his malice by the firm language Henry had held in his late interview, his dastardly spirit had no other resource but to vent

itself upon the defenceless party in his power, and in this his cruelty knew no bounds. In his treatment of Lady Crowbery he kept no terms of decency or reserve, publishing to all parties (not even his own domestics excepted) the charges he had against her—"Will you tell me," he wou'd ask, "that wife is virtuous, who was not only seen by others, but whom I myself saw, hanging upon the neck of a handsome vagabond, embracing him in her arms, and caressing him with all the ecstacy of an enflamed and guilty passion? Who will say that this is not an action that implies criminality so strongly, that ocular demonstration could scarce add to the conviction of it? What other motive but one can a woman of her sort have for a conduct so extraordinary towards a fellow, who is a perfect stranger to her, and who, till she put cloaths upon his back, had not a pocket to hold the money she lavishly bestowed upon him? Will any one persuade me that all these favours and fondnesses are to be accounted for rom mere respect to the memory of a certain parson Ratcliffe, who picked him up as a foundling, and whom she has not set eyes on for these twelve years

past? The merest dupe in nature could not find credulity for such a tale."

In this stile his Lordship took every occasion to vent his grievances, and make public the breach between himself and Lady Crowbery: When in conference with her he would hold a harsher language; and as he pressed for answers, which the difficulty of her situation would not allow her to give, every interview served only to strengthen his conclusions and enflame his animosity.
It was generally suspected that a separation would take place, and this he had threatened her with; but when she showed a willingness to meet him in this measure, he seemed to drop it altogether, and the rather, as in that case her paternal estate would have remained with her, which during their joint establishment was so liberally applied to the common stock, that the major part of the family disbursements was provided for out of her fund. He had however long abandoned all hope of any benefit upon the contingency of his survivorship, and of an heir there was now no longer any prospect. As he had therefore no interest in view on either of these accounts,

he kept no check upon his ill-humour and chagrin, but persecuted her without reserve, absolutely confining her to the house, and, as far as he could prevent it, not suffering her to correspond with any one, particularly her relations of the house of Manstock, to whom he bore peculiar hatred and inveteracy.

"What does your uncle mean," said he in one of his altercations, "by receiving that fellow into his family, who has so effectually destroyed the peace of mine? Can there be a grosser insult, a more outrageous breach of decency and good-manners, than thus to hold him up in my defiance after what has passed, and when he knows that I myself have discovered him in a situation, that no husband, who has any sense of honour, can put up with, nor a wife, who has any sense of modesty, would permit him to be found in? Does Sir Roger think that I want spirit to resent such conduct, or can he suppose that I am tame enough to submit to an indignity, which he renders ten times more galling by the countenance he shews to the despicable object of my resentment—your Ladyship's beggarly Adonis?"

To this she patiently replied, "That her uncle knew her innocence, and the motives of that

tenderness, which pity for the sufferings of the guiltless had extorted from her; that with a heart naturally susceptible of compassion, she had a further interest in the sufferings of the young man in question, as a relict of her valued friend Mr. Ratcliffe, who had protected him from his infancy, lov'd him as a son, and left the strongest testimony in his favour, describing him as endow'd with every good and virtuous quality, that can centre in the human heart: that for these reasons she had determin'd to stand in the place of her deceas'd friend towards an unfortunate youth, who seem'd destin'd to be the victim of suspicion, and to meet punishment where he merited praise."


"'Tis one thing," said my Lord, "to protect; to caress him is another: you, or I, or any body may relieve a beggar, but who embraces him? Your purse you may pour into his hands, but your person you had no right to throw into his arms, seeing that I have a claim upon that, so long as it is my lot to be call'd your husband, and your privilege to bear my name and title."


"True, my lord," she replied, "your right and title to my poor person is absolute and exclusive,

and had my heart been made of sterner stuff, I should not have yielded it even to pity, as you saw; to impurity it has never been surrender'd since you call'd it your's. If your sense of pity cannot find excuse for mine, I must submit to my fate; I have no other means of softening your displeasure."


"Sincerity will soften it," said my Lord; "confession will in part atone for the injury which my honour has receiv'd, because to own your faults is one step towards repenting of them: confess then that you are in love with this young fellow, that you was captivated with his person, that you was surpriz'd into a weakness, which your constitution must apologize for.—Nay, start not, Madam! nor affect to be offended at what I suggest, for that you have lov'd is well known, and that you can go great lengths for those you love is not to be denied; why then may I not presume that your nature is the same, kind, soft and yielding as it ever was? A father's authority could not restrain you, why should I suppose a husband's can? Let me know therefore the extent of my disgrace, and I will then decide as shall be best both for myself and you: till then you must give me leave to suspect the worst, and to

conclude against you as much from your silence and reserve as from my own reason and observation."


"In one word then, my lord, and I call Heaven to witness to the truth of what I say, I am as incapable of the idea you annex to my tenderness for this young man, as I am of murder, incest, blasphemy, or any crime the most dire and detestable that only beings totally abandon'd can commit: the criminality you suspect me of wou'd be such as but to think of makes my blood shudder and my heart shrink back with horror."


"Hold, Madam; not so strong in your expressions, if you please; moderate the energy of your language, if you wish that I should credit the sincerity, or even understand the meaning of it: let me have a plain answer to a plain question—Did you ever see this young man before?"


"I saw him about twelve years ago, soon after my father's death, when he was a child under the care of Mr. Ratcliffe."


"Is he the bastard son of parson Ratcliffe?"


"That is a plain question truly, my lord: your delicacy might have couch'd it in politer terms."



"Very true, Madam, I should have been more select in my expressions, as I might have recollected that none are so affectedly regardful of the forms of delicacy as those, who have bidden adieu to the essentials of it."


"'Tis well, my lord; I shall give you no further opportunity of insulting me, by answering to no further questions: here ends our conference; proceed against me as you please; be as cruel as your heart will let you; there is a friend at hand that will soon rescue me from your tyranny."


"Say you so, Madam! Who is that friend?"


"Death."



CHAPTER VI. Danger approaches, and the Doctor is dismiss'd.
IN this manner the sad and heavy hours dragged slowly on at Crowbery castle. Domestic altercations, jealousies, and complaints on the part of Lord Crowbery, pressed down the spirits, and now began to sap and undermine the constitution of his unhappy lady.

Her confinement was become no less a matter of necessity than of obedience; she took her meals, and passed her whole day, in her separate apartment; and as great pains were bestowed in keeping the affair of Blachford's plot and its providential issue from her knowledge, it was not till after the dialogue recited in the preceding chapter had taken place, that she came to the knowledge of that disgraceful business.
His Lordship's suspicion pointed at Zachary as the informer on this occasion; and though a pretty strict watch was kept upon him in his visits, probably the suspicion aforesaid was not ill placed, for our honest Doctor had great attachment to his noble patient, and very little to her ignoble lord: our hero also had an interest in his heart; Blachford he detested, and though he did his duty to him faithfully and skilfully, for he had now performed the operation of the trepan, yet if he had been dressing the wounds of a wretch condemned for murder, he probably could not have felt less sympathy for the sufferings of his patient. The impression, which the story of Blachford's plot made upon Lady Crowbery's mind, was such as left a strong persuasion of my Lord's participation in that base attempt, and from this moment she

could not see him without horror: fixt in her resolution to enter into no further discussions with him, all intercourse between them was suspended.
One day, as she was sitting alone and pensive in her chamber, ruminating on the sad fortune of her life, and the miseries which an attachment fatally traversed had entailed upon her, as she drew out her handkerchief to staunch the tears that were flowing from her eyes, a little packet dropt on the floor, which she took up, and soon discovered to be the same that Henry had delivered to her, inclosing the ring, but which, in the hurry of her spirits at that moment, she had hastily put into her pocket, and from that time it had escaped her recollection.
What was her surprize, upon unfolding the envelope, to discover the very ring she had given to her beloved Delapoer, when they exchanged their pledges, and solemnly devoted their hearts and affections each to the other.
With eager trepidation she turned it over and over, minutely examining it in every part. The hair, the stone, the setting, the motto, every particle deposed to the identity of the object; not a doubt remained; astonishment

possessed her wholly; she shook in every joint, and feit a tumult at her heart, that her enfeebled frame could scarce support. Happily she was alone; and when she could command sufficient recollection to debate the case, and shape her thoughts into some form and order, she began to give them vent, talking to herself, in broken sentences, after the following manner:—"The very ring I gave to Delapoer! the pledge of love, my first, my only love! assuredly it is the same! I cannot be mistaken! Oh memory of a fond fleeting moment, thou art much too faithful to deceive, or be deceiv'd! How came it here? Is he that own'd it living, and return'd to England, or is he dead, and, dying, gave it in commission to some friend to render back to me? Let me recal to mind what Henry told me; a man had found it, a poor man, return'd from transportation; that may be himself; well may he call it so; 'twas banishment, 'twas transportation for the crime of loving one, whom the hard heart of an inexorable parent wrested from his arms too late for honour. Ah cruel father! there was a moment, when, if you had relented, your poor child had never known these agonies, that now must plunge her in the grave: had you permitted

her to take her own heart's choice, and at the altar sanctify those vows, which Heaven had heard and register'd, your daughter had been now a happy mother, and posterity wou'd have blessed you; instead of which, behold a jealous tyrant and a barren bed! Oh! barbarous soul-enslaving law, devis'd in an accursed hour to counteract the first great blessing pronounc'd by the Creator on his works, which alike makes wretched those who obey, and those who desperately evade it; which gives a power to parents that is their curse, entailing a dreadful responsibility on such as enforce it, and violating the most sacred privileges of all who are restrain'd by it."

This said, she rose, and opening a little casket, where other tokens were deposited, lodged it amongst them, referring it to time, the revealer of all mysteries, to elucidate this amongst the rest; and recollecting it had been told her by Henry, that the finder of the ring said he would call again for his reward—"Alas!" said she, as this reflection occurred, "what have I to bestow, that Delapoer wou'd now deem a reward? Cou'd I endure the meeting, ought I even to wish it? Shou'd I not in discretion avoid it? If there

is any remnant of affection left in his heart for me, will not the sight of such a faded form, and the discovery of my wretchedness, give anguish to his feelings?—But then my son! my Henry!—How else shall I disclose to Delapoer the interesting intelligence that he is a father? O Henry, for thy sake I wou'd abide that trial!"

It was now the hour for Zachary to pay his professional visit: curiosity, or some motive not connected with kindness, induced Lord Crowbery to accompany him on this occasion: his presence was not calculated to quiet uneasiness of any kind; and Zachary's fingers had no sooner touched his patient's pulse, than he gave my Lord a significant look, which not only indicated alarm at what he discovered by his touch, but seemed to intimate that he knew, by his intuition, where the cause of it was to be found.

"I am told, madam," said my lord, "you are indisposed; I should wish to hear the nature of your complaint, and what this gentleman's opinion is of your case."


"So please you, my lord," replied the man of medicine, "it is not our practice to discuss those points in the hearing of our patients."



"Cannot you prescribe then," said the Peer, "when I am present; or have you no advice to offer, till you have consulted with her Ladyship what remedy she likes best?"

There was a taunting sneer in this, which Zachary's spirit did not quite relish; he had all due consideration for the dignity of a noble; but he was not without some sense of his own consequence, and the honour also due unto the physician: he answered, therefore, with more quickness than was expected, that, to the best of such judgment as he possessed, he should prescribe in due time; but there was a disorder in her ladyship's pulse, which he took to be incidental rather than symptomatic, and he believed the best remedy for her case, at present, would be perfect quiet and a silent room.

"By which I am to understand," rejoined the peer, "that you cou'd very readily dispense with my company, and remain here yourself—will that promote silence, do you think? If you have nothing to say that I shou'd not hear, and silence be so necessary for her ladyship, I can sit here without opening my lips, whilst you pursue your observations without interruption, and meditate at leisure on the remedies you are to apply."



"My Lord," replied the sage, "if I am worthy to be entrusted with the health of Lady Crowbery, I hope I am not suspected as unfit to be left with her in private."


"No more arguing, Mr. Apothecary, if you please," quoth the noble intruder; "do the business you are sent for; and remember, that it is for the contents of your gallipots, and not for the charms of your conversation, that I employ you in my family."


"I have been employ'd," quoth Zachary, "for my lady and her family, many years before I was honour'd with your Lordship's commands, and I never was treated in Sir Andrew's family but with confidence and kindness: I hope I am not likely to forget my station in society, and how far it is removed from that, which your Lordship now fills; but I can at the same time recollect, that the distance between them has not always been so great."

For the better understanding of this glance, at the conclusion of Zachary's reply, we must inform the reader, that the noble personage, at whom it was pointed, had, in the early days of his worldly pilgrimage, walked in the humble line of an officer of his Majesty's customs,

in which station he was totally unnoticed by the head of his family, and, indeed, by every other family whose notice was worth having, until the title, and such part of the estate as was entailed upon it by a variety of intermediate contingencies, devolved on him. Though not deficient in talents of a certain sort, he had been greatly cramped in his education by the poverty of his parents, and, as far as precept and example reach, very little benefited by either. With the great world, since he had been made a part of it, he had formed little or no acquaintance; and conscious of his deficiencies in the acquirements of a gentleman, he had never taken his seat since his accession to the peerage; shutting himself up in his castle with a few mean dependants about him, who flattered him in his humours, whilst they fed at his table, he lived in sullen pride, avoiding all his neighbours of a better sort, and avoided by them. When he made proposals for his present lady, he had newly succeeded to his title, and, it may well be presumed, he was more indebted to a certain incident in her history, well remembered by her father, though carefully concealed, than to the elegance of his own manners and address. A title and

estate, however, were circumstances not overlooked in the brief catalogue of his accomplishments; they doubtless had their weight with Sir Andrew; and for the lady's share in the transaction, that was purely negative; a broken spirit, a dubious reputation, and a blank indifference to all mankind, with one exception only, made her consent to an act of duty and atonement, not of choice and free will. In this manner they married, and upon the terms which such marriages naturally produce, they lived together joyless, comfortless, childless.
The glance, therefore, which Zachary had retorted upon his lordship's former obscurity, roused his present dignity into a flame of rage. It is not in the art of the most ingenious tormentor to punish the object of his vengeance half so bitterly, as the proud man, without any art or ingenuity at all, naturally contrives to punish himself. No sooner had Zachary's words entered the porches of his ears, than in an instant, like the leporous distilment described by Hamlet's ghost, it coursed through all the natural gates and alleys of his blood, post-haste, to the seat and head quarters of the spleen (if any of my readers know where that is to be found) and there it swelled and fermented at

such a rate, that his bosom was not wide enough to hold it, but out it burst, sputtering and frothing, from his lips, in accents very little resembling those that shortly after fell with gentle cadence from the softer lips of Lady Crowbery. Enough was understood, from the inarticulate vehemence of his lordship's wrath, to discover that Zachary Cawdle, surgeon, apothecary, and man-midwife, was in no future time to exercise any one of these several branches of his art within the walls of Crowbery Castle, or upon the person of any one who belonged thereunto.
Zachary had risen from his seat with an irascibility little less than boiling hot, and with a countenance, whole scarlet hue of downright honest anger wonderfully contrasted the pale and sickly complection of his lordship's malice, when the gentle invalid, directing a look of mild benevolence to her discarded attendant, addressed herself to him in the following terms—"Farewel, my long approv'd and worthy friend! I lose your services when they can be of no further use to me; you see the situation I am in, and you know it is incurable. It is not in your art to save me, and you are only dismissed from a fruitless attendance, and

the painful spectacle of an expiring friend. For all past care and kindness, and a thousand zealous offices, which your good will to me has prompted you to perform, I render you my last, my cordial thanks. Go to my uncle Manstock; tell him I am in a fair way to shake off all complaints, and want no more medical assistance: when that is over, and my cure completed, he will shew you that your services have not been overlook'd, and that I have bequeath'd you a fee, which I hope will set me clear at the close of our account."


"God forbid! God forbid!" cried Zachary, the tears bubbling from his eyes, "it shou'd be my sad lot to outlive you. Providence in its mercy restore you! But continue, I beseech you, the valerian draughts: I had other medicines in reserve; but I take heaven to witness, I am dismiss'd from my attendance, when my patient's pulse is at a hundred and twenty-five."




CHAPTER VII. Shews how some People pass their Time in the Country.
ZACHARY returned disconsolate to his shop.—"How do we go on at Lord Crowbery's?" quoth Alexander Kinloch.—"The devil take Lord Crowbery," replied Zachary, "and that blind bitch Fortune into the bargain, for putting a coronet over the ears of a custom-house officer."—"She has put a crest as well as a coronet over his ears, if Fame says true," resum'd Kinloch, with a grin.—"If Fame says that, Fame lies," said Zachary. "A fellow that but yesterday, as it were, trampt about with a pen and inkhorn in his button-hole, to talk to me in such a stile: I have been treated scurvily, friend Sawney; he has dismiss'd me from all further attendance on his lady: poor dear soul, she will be lost without my help; there is not a man in England can discern the cause of her complaint so well as I can; it breaks my heart to think that any other person shou'd prescribe to her; yet there's not a minute to be lost, for her pulse was going at an hundred and twenty-five

when I left her."—"That betokens a crisis," said Kinloch.—"Right," quoth the Doctor, "and 'tis then the patient has most need of a physician; urgente morbo adsit medicus."—"I foresaw what wou'd happen," cried the North Briton; "your own dear wife has made all the mischief, tattling about Henry and my lady, and how they met at your house, and what passed at their meeting when she hug'd him in her arms, which has been told my lord; and so they wou'd not let the man be a cuckold in quiet, but must be talking to him about it, which, if it was your own case, you must confess, is not the pleasantest thing to hear; but for my part I make it a rule to let all such trifles pass, and say nothing of the matter."—"Aye, aye," answered Zachary, "you are a wise man, Sawney, and know how to keep peace and silence in a family; but my tippling saint of a wife has such a curst tongue of her own, that there is nothing she so dearly loves as scandal, except it be the brandy-bottle; but her pleasure will be her poison, for she's tack'd in the liver, and tumbling off the perch. As for that blustering lord, his custom I shou'd not value at a doit, nor his castle neither, if my lady was not in it; I can live without

either; for I don't believe that obstinate fellow has taken a dose of my drugs these ten years past, and if he lets it alone for ten years to come I care not; let him go off in his own way; I shou'd be sorry to save him a trip to the other world, and employ my skill in his cure, which I must in conscience do, was I call'd in; 'tis exactly the case with justice Blachford; I know I am defrauding the devil of his due by keeping him alive; but if a man won't die when his brains are out, how can I help it? If some folks had had the handling of his scull, the world before this wou'd have been rid of a monster."

Whether the deputy doctor took this as a side-blow at himself I cannot say, but certainly a learned dispute sprung up between him and his principal upon the application of the trepan, which branch'd out into so many zigzags and crosscuts, and was carried on with so little method, and so much abuse of brevity, that after Zachary's vanity had run foul of Alexander's spleen, his choler began to chafe and fume at such a rate, that pestle and mortar never set up a more clamorous argument than now ensued between master and man, which

was only put an end to by the superior din of Jemima's bell.
In the mean time the hours at Manstock House moved on in harmony and peace: each division of the day had its appropriated occupation or amusement: the morning ride, the social meal, the evening walk, the hour of rest, each link of time kept it's due place and period: order and regularity were so perfectly observed throughout the whole establishment, that though the spirit of the master pervaded every part, his voice was no where heard; the domestics were a numerous body, but, like well-disciplined veterans, each knew his duty, and no one swerved from it.
Here our hero might have reposed in absolute tranquillity, had his feelings been less alive to the disconsolate situation of his suffering mother, or had his wandering fancy (for why should I conceal the truth?) permitted him to enjoy the comforts of an amiable society, without a profest partiality to any one in particular belonging to it: but nature and philosophy are at constant variance; the warmth which one inspires ill suits the coolness which the other prescribes. Though the

conversation of Sir Roger and the Reverend Mr. Claypole offered all the edification that experience could minister to a youthful hearer, yet perverse nature (or something we are willing to ascribe to nature) biassed the judgment of our hero so as to induce him to prefer the slightest syllable, that gave motion to Isabella's lovely lips, before all the anecdotes of Sir Roger, or the metaphysics of Mr. Claypole: this was not a preference which his understanding gave, for that he never called into council on the question; but he listened as his eyes directed him, and judged as his heart prescribed. Though he was not to learn that time moves on with equal step, yet he miscalculated most grossly, reckoning hours but as minutes when alone with Isabella, and minutes as hours without her. Any other person would have found out these were symptoms of love, Henry only found out they were mistakes, and never ventured to search into the cause of them: Isabella, who was even less experienced, and somewhat younger than himself, was so sure that she loved no human creature comparably to her father, and really did love him with such true devotion, that she had no idea there might be attachments of another sort

to share her heart with him, and, in the full conviction of her own security, never once thought of what she held impossible to happen; she took her evening walks with Henry by her side, and then the weather was so fine, or the prospect so charming, or the discourse so entertaining, that the minutes stole away so imperceptibly she could not understand how they were gone so fast, and she so far from home; now she must hasten back, and Henry's arm was wanted to assist her speed: stiles sometimes intervened, and then both arms found full employment; hillocks, and dales, and foot planks over rills with waters half a foot in depth tremendously rolling underneath, demanded a conductor of no small address; in defiles and difficulties like these, all Henry's care was none too much; yet they occurred so frequently, that slander would have said they were more sought than shunned.
Sometimes, when nothing more material occupied her thoughts, Isabella would divert the subject of discourse to questions about Susan May.—"Did'nt Henry think her very pretty?—Was'nt she a very open-hearted natural girl, a little wild or so?—Had'nt she turn'd off her late mistress on his account? and

did'nt that look as if she had a liking for him?"—These were leading questions, which Henry did not always chuse to follow without swerving. With a great respect for truth, he had something more than respect for the person he was to address it to, and though he scorned to say what was directly false, he did not altogether like to say what was strictly true. A little equivocation, but as little as his delicacy could dispense with, he certainly made free with upon these occasions; and if Isabella did not give him perfect credit for sincerity in all particulars, it was because she was as thoroughly informed of facts, as Susan's full confession, honestly avowed, could make her: she was not however so mere a novice in the world as not to comprehend that there are subjects, on which men of delicacy will not be perfectly explicit; but on the point of reputation Isabella was as forward to believe, as he was firm in asserting, the perfect innocence of Susan's conduct; pure in her own nature, she was too candid in her judgment of others to suspect that want of chastity was implied in freedom of behaviour.
In their conversations about Lady Crowbery, their hearts and tongues completely coincided

in bearing testimony to the loveliness of her nature, and in lamenting her unhappy lot.—"I should not wonder," said Isabella, "if that cross ugly creature was to scold and scandalize my poor cousin for what he saw in the plantation walk, when her benevolent heart overflow'd with tenderness and pity for you, so that she could scarce support herself from sinking to the ground; his hard nature is not capable of understanding, and allowing for the soft emotions of a soul like her's. I know what she felt on your account, because I have heard her talk so warmly in your praise, and how Mr. Ratcliffe lov'd and admir'd you; and then she wou'd bewail his loss, and the misfortunes which it brought on you; I know also the impression that Lord Crowbery's behaviour made on her, and how she execrated that horrid Blachford, whom Providence has now chastis'd; and I don't doubt but she foresaw some wicked plot wou'd be concerted against you, as in fact it was: all these terrors were in her mind when she was so affected as to fall upon your neck, and vent herself in tears; and who can wonder at it? What is so touching as the sight of innocence distress'd and persecuted? How could a heart so soft

and sensitive as her's reflect on all that you had suffer'd, all that you was still expos'd to, and not melt with sympathy? Was ever act so noble, generous, and humane, rewarded with such base, malicious, and unjust oppression? For my part I cannot conceive how any one of common feelings can hear the story and be unmov'd: I'm not asham'd to say my tears kept pace with her's on the occasion; yet I was not inform'd of all particulars, as she was; neither was I, like her, the friend of Mr. Ratcliffe; I had not seen you, but as you pass'd into the house of Mr. Cawdle; she had both seen you and discours'd with you, and heard those worthy creatures at the cottage, in their natural manner, relate a thousand circumstances, which your modesty would not speak of. Heavens! must we be hypocrites because we are women! withhold our love for virtue in the dread of slander, and not bestow our praise and admiration where they are so justly due! That would be hard indeed! But when we see a character like this accused, insulted, punished, treated like a malefactor and a murderer, all mouths open, all hearts shut against him, without a friend, or house, or food, but what one poor widow and her charitable cruise supplied,

what heart can stand it? and he must be a monster that can doubt my cousin's purity, because her arms encircled what her heart pitied and approv'd."

Here Isabella paus'd: Henry was silent; it was a subject he would not venture to commit himself upon; his too great sensibility to a mother's praises might excite suspicion: Isabella resum'd her discourse—"To be sure, if people will decide from appearances only, the most innocent actions may be construed into guilt, and, as I take Lord Crowbery to be one of those people, I am sadly afraid my poor cousin may suffer wrongfully by his hasty temper; not that he can seriously and from his heart suspect a woman of her established character; but he may pretend to do it for the malicious pleasure of tormenting her; for I am sorry to say, I think him capable of being very cruel, nay I am sure he is, having been a painful witness of very harsh treatment on his part; in short, he is a bad husband, and nothing surprises me more, than that a person of her taste and intuition should have been deceiv'd by such a character; and that with youth, beauty, great fortune, and good sense, she should be induc'd to marry a man neither suitable to her

in age, manners, principle, or person; nay, I rather wonder she should marry at all, at least whilst her father was alive, for she was then exactly in the situation I am now, the only solace of a widow'd parent; and sure it is a daughter's duty (Heaven knows I feel it such) never to quit that post till nature's debt is paid by one or other of the parties."

As she spoke these words, they had approach'd the gate that opened to the garden from the park; Henry advanced towards it, but, stopping short, he turned, and with an anxious look asked if what she had now delivered was her determined purpose and opinion.—"Assuredly it is," she said; "for what have I to think of, blest with such a father, but to please and study him? Can I fulfil two duties at a time? Never will I devote less than my whole heart to him; how then can I divide it with another? No, no, that is impossible: whilst he has life and health I shall be happy in my present state; if Heaven should snatch that blessing from me, I shall have full employment for the short remainder of my wretched days in mourning and lamenting him."

The tears were starting from her eyes; sympathy, or some other impulse, struck the

heart of Henry: he supported himself against the gate, trembling and pale, as if some sudden faintness had come over him: it was a transient attack; a few moments sufficed to recal his recollection; when, half sighing, half smothering a sigh, he thus began in gentle terms to controvert what she had said—"Your sentiments, Miss Manstock, are too amiable not to be admir'd, but suffer me to say, too melancholy to be admitted without some reserve: Daughters have sacrific'd their youth and beauty to the pious offices which you describe; but it has been to parents helpless and distrest, to age, to poverty, or to sickness, which otherwise had wanted those kind services that they bestow'd:—the Grecian Daughter was a heroine that stands, as you well know, recorded to all ages for her filial piety; she fed her father in a prison, but, take notice, he had else been famish'd; remember too, that daughter was herself a mother; and, let me not offend your delicacy if I presume to say, that in a heart like your's, filial affection may possess its place, and yet make room for connubial love, without restricting either. To put the case, that any man is likely to be found, who may deserve your love, is more for argument

than fact; I know of no such man, nor am inclin'd to think our sex can boast of one, who merits such distinguish'd happiness; but grant there was, could he desire to divert you from the exercise of those attentions, which must at once endear your character to him, and by his sharing them might recommend his character to you? Think for a moment what his gratitude must be to the author and bestower of all his earthly happiness; by heavens! I think his reverence and devotion to your father must be such, as hardly to be exceeded by your own; how then, by adding his attentions, could the sum of them be less? When age and infirmity shall call for support, might not his manly strength, activity, and courage conspire to uphold that venerable parent, which your soft sensibility and gentle pity would be employ'd to sooth? This, you must own, would be to double rather than divide your grateful task. But when you speak of dedicating your surviving days to sorrow, I must hope you speak but as you apprehend, and not as you wou'd act. I know, alas! the agonizing loss of one, that was to me a father, a voluntary father; and, methinks, that is an obligation on my part beyond what Nature can impose; a duty more

impressive than the nearest ties of blood can devolve upon a son: that father is dead, and his death plung'd me not only in affliction but in adversity; still I have a post to keep, and I must not desert it: one man, at least, snatch'd from destruction, has some cause to say I have not liv'd in vain; but you, belov'd, admir'd, ador'd, you should well reflect, before you give yourself to such sad thoughts, how many you make sad thereby; for, be assur'd, should you sink under affliction, you would not sink alone."

Nature hath given to some a tone, a manner, an expression, that makes language but a secondary vehicle for what passes in their mind: this endowment Henry possessed in a most striking degree; his heart was in his features, voice, and action. Isabella needed no interpreter to understand his feelings in their full extent: how to recal a resolution vouched to solemnly she knew not, yet something she wished to say or do to mitigate it.
By one of those unpremeditated movements, which Nature sometimes betrays us into before our perception can correct it, her hand was pressed by his: which was the aggressor in their meeting neither party knew; the one

therefore could not reprove the other, yet both were awakened to reflection at the same moment, both sympathized in the same effect, and both were overspread with blushes. There was a thrilling nerve that ran to Isabella's heart, through which her sensibility conveyed a voice that whispered to her—"She had said too much:"—a second notice intimated to her—"That 'twas no crime to love:"—a third, and that was followed by a throng of soft insinuating ideas, suggested to her pity a regret, that one so brave, so young, so generous, so engaging, should languish in despair, and deprecate her stern decree in vain.—"He'll die," these tempters said, "if this your cruel resolution should take place: why tell him he must never hope? 'twou'd be but charity to leave him that delusion for his temporary comfort."—To all these arguments her heart in gentleness accorded, and as language was not needful, and probably not present for the purpose, in that instant he felt, or fancied that he felt, a gentle trembling pressure of his hand by her's: a blush of sensibility glowed on his cheeks: it was health to his sick hope, light to his dark despair, oil to that dying spark, which reason scarce permitted to languish in his desponding bosom:

still he repress'd all rapture; tenderly, but yet respectfully, he stoop'd his lips upon her hand—"You are all excellence," he cried; "'tis so I should expect the friend of my protectress, and the daughter of the best of men, to console the mourner: I have been witness to your filial love and piety, Heaven grant I never may be witness to your sorrows; for Heaven can testify how gladly I would meet my death to rescue and preserve that sacred life, so dear to you, and keep affliction from the tenderest heart that ever animated the most lovely form."



CHAPTER VIII. He is the true Hero, that can conquer himself.
THE next morning brought Doctor Zachary Cawdle to Manstock House. No sooner did the figure of old Bess, shuffling under the non-elastic load of her rider in the cinnamon suit, cross the optics of our hero, then upon a solitary ramble in the park, than he ran to the encounter.—"What news," cried he, "my worthy master?"—"Ill news," quoth the rider in cinnamon, "for those who are

sick, when I am dismiss'd: that pettyfogging peer has put me out of his house, when the situation of his lady should have kept me in it."—"No matter for that," eagerly resum'd the other; "tell me how that lady is."—"How should she be," again quoth Zachary, "when I am not allow'd to come near her? And do you say no matter for that? Marry, but there is a great deal of matter, and matter of a very ugly nature, and a very rapid pulse, let me tell you; and I should think no man, who has ever been within the sound of my pestle, wou'd have the hardiness to say, no matter for that."


"Pardon me, my good Doctor," replied Henry; "mine were the words of impatience, not of contempt: I am very seriously alarm'd for Lady Crowbery."—"Enough said," quoth the Doctor; "'tis natural you should be alarm'd for one so near to you, and your impatience is excusable. As we have here no listeners within reach of us, I shall let you know that I am made privy to what has pass'd between you and your mother, and that I bear you the blessing of that best of ladies; she is indeed a saint, a suffering saint and martyr to the meerest persecutor in creation."—The

filial heart of Henry swelled with indignation, his eyes sparkled, and his cheeks flushed, as he broke forth into vehement denunciations against Lord Crowbery, and it was with some difficulty Zachary could preach him into patience; the storm, however, subsided by degrees; and when Zachary told him, that he came over at his mother's desire, to consult with Sir Roger Manstock, he became perfectly calm, and declared that he would resign himself to what that worthy person should advise: at the same time he said, that he could not but lament the peculiarity of his situation, which invested him with a character, that he was not permitted to avow; and as the relation in which he stood with regard to Lady Crowbery was not known to Sir Roger Manstock, he could not expect, that any such part would be assigned to him in that lady's vindication, as his interest in her wrongs would otherwise intitle him to demand. The result of the conference, however, was an appeal to Sir Roger in the first place, and for this purpose Zachary proceeded onwards towards the house, whilst our hero struck into the grove adjoining, which, by a more circuitous path, led to the same point.
Upon entering this scene of meditation and

retirement, Henry found himself unexpectedly encountered by a fair nymph, whom fortune seemed to seize every occasion of throwing in his way, when solitude and secrecy conspired to put his virtue to the test. Susan May was on her return from the village, where she had been to welcome her mother to her new habitation, which she had that morning taken possession of. Though certain events had now parted these friends into separate spheres of life, Henry accosted her in the same stile and manner as when they lived together upon the level: their conversation began by her recounting the kindnesses of Miss Manstock to her mother, and the comforts she had provided for that good woman in her new abode: Ezekiel Daw had staid behind to attend the calls of Justice Blachford, who, in his lucid intervals (if such they might be termed) was visited by certain fits of terror and compunction, which made the spiritual assistance of that pious creature not unwelcome to him, and it is needless to remark, that from duties like this Ezekiel was, by no interest or allurement, to be detached.
Henry's mind was, just now, too much occupied to be in the best of all possible dispositions

for the present meeting, but it was not in his nature to give pain to a fond heart like Susan's; he made no effort, therefore, to divert the conversation from those interesting points, to which she wished to lead it. Few girls of Susan's sort had greater quickness of intuition; and as love is, in some cases, a mighty sharpener of the eye-sight, she had taken her observations pretty accurately as to the effect of Isabella's bright eyes upon the heart of Henry, and being fully satisfied she had no chance against such a rival, she good-naturedly resolved to do him all the services in her power with that young lady, and though she had little comfort to administer to him at present, yet she discerned enough to warrant her in talking on the subject, and reporting such particulars as might serve, at least, to keep the spark of hope alive; when Henry, therefore, asked her if she was happy in her service, she answered, that her young lady was an angel for goodness, and if she herself was not as happy as she might be, it was only because she was not altogether so wise as she ought to be; but time, she observed, would cure her of those follies which had taken such possession of her:—"A kind word however," added she, "now and then bestow'd

upon me, when superior objects do not engross your attention, will be a generous way of assuring me, that I am not entirely out of your thoughts; more than this I do not expect, but without this I should indeed be wretched."

Henry consoled her with the most soothing assurances, and he accompanied them with certain tender looks and actions, which carry more persuasion with them, than the strongest professions can convey without them. Turning to him with a smile—"Ah! my dear friend!" she cried, "I suspect there is a certain lady of mine, not far off, who will give you the heart-ache before long, and then you will know what it is that we poor love-sick mortals suffer; these evening walks of your's, with that captivating fair one, will lead you into a maze that will puzzle you to escape from, unless I give you a clue to guide you out of it. We women of the chamber have many opportunities of diving into the secrets of our mistresses, especially of such as, like my lady, are all nature and sincerity. I must tell you then, in one word, that there is a terrible resolution gone out against all mankind at once, never to marry; she has made a vow to devote herself to her father; she has not the most distant idea

of falling in love; and has been very curious in her enquiries, how it came to pass that I suffered myself to be surprised into so extraordinary a weakness. I laid it all upon Nature and a tender heart: this she did not admit; for she contended, that her heart was as tender, and her nature as compassionate as another's; that she could pity the unfortunate, admire the brave, and applaud the deserving; but to sigh, and pine, and languish, as she conceived I did, was what she had no conception of. Love to our parents, and good will to the rest of the world, she thought was all that any one heart could fairly entertain, and as much as in reason it ought to undertake for. At this I smiled, and took the freedom to tell her, (for she is the most frank and affable creature living) that, according to the old saying, it was every body's fate to fall in love once in their lives; and if that was true, my destiny was past, and her's was to come: as for myself, I own'd I was justly punished for presuming to think of one so infinitely my superior in all respect; but nobody could prevent their fate; and I doubted if many were to be found, who could be indifferent to an object so deserving."


"There you spoke too humbly of yourself,"

said Henry, "and too partially of your friend."—"My young lady did not seem to think so," replied Susan; "and, if I have any guess at her heart, you have more interest there than she is aware of."—Here they found themselves at the extremity of the grove, and within sight of the house.—"Adieu!" cried Susan, "I must not be seen with you:—Persist couragiously, and you will conquer: my life upon it, Miss Manstock has a heart dispos'd to you and love."—"Has she so?" cried Henry, and suddenly stopt short, whilst Susan quickened her pace, and left him to his reflections.—"Has she a heart for me and love," he repeated; "and shall that flattery tempt me to persist? 'Tis fatal flattery, and I will not pursue it. Grant it were truth; grant that I cou'd succeed to gain an interest in her heart, to shake her resolutions, and detach her from the duteous purposes to which she has devoted herself; can I reconcile such conduct to the principles of honour, and the gratitude I owe to her father, the uncle of my mother? What presumption wou'd it be in me to conceive, that I can be acceptable to Sir Roger Manstock, as a pretender to his daughter! 'Tis impossible! Circumstanc'd as I am, it is against all reason

to suppose he cou'd admit of my addresses. What then am I doing? Gratifying a propensity that will be my ruin; listening to advice, that, whilst it flatters my vanity, conspires to blind my reason, and betray my honour. I will not persist; no, Susan, though I were sure to conquer, as you call it, I will not follow your seducing council; I will stop whilst it is yet in my power; I will tear myself away from the snares, which every moment of delay will draw closer about me, and escape, whilst I have strength and resolution for the effort. If ever that day comes, when Sir Roger Manstock shall know me as the cousin of Isabella, and if this tumult at my heart shall be quieted by time and absence, he may then once more receive me, as one attach'd to him by gratitude and consanguinity, and permit me to pay to him the devotion of a son, and to his belov'd Isabella the attentions of a brother: this will be something still; it will be tender friendship, it will be love, that strikes no sting into the conscience; it may assuage her sorrows when she will want a comforter, and enable her to say, when her father's eyes shall close—'I have fulfill'd my promise, I have persisted in my resolution, and devoted my whole heart to the

pious duties of a daughter.'—By heavens! 'tis great, 'tis noble! Shall I rob her of this triumph? I will go this instant, and prepare for my departure."



CHAPTER IX. It now becomes doubtful, if a certain Hero is any Hero at all.
HAVING thus decided betwixt love and honour, our hero, firm in his gallant purpose, marched triumphantly to the house; here, on the very threshold of the hall, he was met by the lovely object who had occasioned all his struggles.—"I have been seeking you," she said, "all over the house: I am terribly afraid there is some bad news of my dear Lady Crowbery, for her Doctor is closetted with my father, and I dare not interrupt them. They have been calling for you in the library, and I am sure you will put me out of suspense as soon as you can learn what it is that has happened."—"Certainly," replied Henry; "but I believe I have heard the whole: Lady Crowbery is indispos'd, but I hope not dangerously;

if I hear any thing more, you shall be informed of it."—This said, he passed on to the library, where Zachary and the worthy Baronet were in close confabulation: at their desire he seated himself between them.—"Henry," (said Sir Roger Manstock) "I have just now receiv'd a very unpleasant account from this gentleman, which makes it necessary for me to pay a visit to my niece at Crowbery castle, without delay. I am afraid there is too much cause to apprehend a speedy decline; and as my Lord is not dispos'd to avail himself of this worthy gentleman's skill and experience, it behoves me very seriously to urge him to some other measures for her relief, with all the expedition that her case demands. If this were all I had to do, I shou'd not suppose that any difference cou'd arise between my Lord and me; but I suspect there will be some points of a more difficult nature to discuss, in which we cannot possibly agree, so long as he persists to avow certain jealousies and suspicions of his lady, my niece, which I hold to be highly injurious, and totally without foundation: in this part of the business, Henry, it happens that you are involv'd; and though I want no protestations on your part to satisfy

my mind in the matter, yet if Lord Crowbery either cannot, or will not, be brought to reason upon any other terms, than your consenting to put yourself at a greater distance than where you now are, I am free to say, it is a requisition, however unreasonable, to which I shou'd be dispos'd to sacrifice the enjoyments I derive from your society, rather than to leave him any pretence for the complaints, which, I understand, he makes of me, and the very harsh treatment, which, I am griev'd to hear, he practises against my niece."

Henry now heard the very measure proposed, that he was pre-determined to adopt; his answer therefore was ready, and his acquiescence unqualified.—"I shall be gone, Sir," he cried, "before his lordship can repeat his murmurs against you for harbouring a guest so obnoxious to his repose: as for the suspicions he annexes to my stay in his neighbourhood, I will not so degrade the evidence of truth and innocence, as to honour those suspicions with a discussion; they are the forgeries of his own malicious imagination, fabricated with the base design of giving some colour of excuse for that tyranny of temper, which it is natural to him to indulge in, and of which,

it seems (just Heaven requite him for his cruelty!) your injured niece, and my ever honour'd benefactress, is to be the victim. For her sake I am not only ready to forego the comforts, the delights of abiding here under your protection, but to remove myself to any distance, far as sea and land can carry me, if so requir'd, beyond the reach of his pretended jealousy. But let him have a care how he does more than brood in secret on his suspicions; let him confine his murmurs within the dark recesses of his own gloomy breast; let him take heed how he circulates them beyond the walls of that castle, in which he keeps innocence immur'd; for if any word of his shall reach my ears, by which he attaches my name to an imputation, that my nature shrinks from with horror unutterable, the cause is then my own, and I will bring him to so strict a reckoning, as shall either silence his calumny, or stifle my resentment, for ever."

As the youthful hero of this story thus delivered himself, his eyes glistened, and the spot of anger glowed upon his cheek. Sir Roger noted his emotion, and was enraptured, not less by the contemplation of his countenance, than by the energy of his sentiments: so

charmed was he with what he saw and heard, that his heart smote him with compunction for having signified to him a kind of warning from his house.—"Gracious Heaven!" he cried, turning to Zachary, and striking his hands together, (as was customary with him when surprised with any sudden thought) "am I to sacrifice the delight of cherishing a spirit like this, in compliment to the caprice of a domestic tyrant? What store of virtues do I contemplate dawning in the bosom of this gallant youth; and shall I lose the pride of fostering their growth? It is too much: Henry, my noble fellow, we'll set this paltry Peer at naught; I never can consent to part from you."

Age had not deadened the sensibility of this venerable old man; he was greatly moved, his voice shook, and he clasped the hand of Henry in his. Zachary, who had much of the milk, or rather the butter, of human kindness in his composition, melted like a thaw; and taking out his handkerchief, without any finesse, began a tune upon his olfactory organ little less sonorous, and not more musical, than the cow-horn of Joe Jenkins. Our hero himself was shaken, but not overthrown; his

courage reeled, but it did not go back from the post he had taken, and he maintained his resolution of abiding by Sir Roger's first proposal, which he asserted to be necessary on more accounts than one; at the same time he expressed a hope, that he might be allowed to accompany him to the castle, where he thought he had a right to appear, as the party accused; and observing withal, it was possible that Sir Roger, in conference with a person of Lord Crowbery's brutal nature, and alone, might not be treated with all the respect due to his person and character.
This proposal did not suit the spirit of Sir Roger, neither was it a thing practicable or adviseable, so that he put a peremptory negative upon it at once, adding, in a tone of voice somewhat above his usual key, that if an affront was offered to himself or family, though he was too old for hasty measures, he was not yet past the age for manly resentment. He now ordered four horses to be put to his chaise with all haste, and desired Henry to inform Miss Manstock, that he was simply going to pay a visit to Lady Crowbery, and wou'd return to dinner.
Charged with this commission, Henry returned

to the hall, where the lovely Isabella was still waiting, and made his report. She expressed herself much alarmed by the tidings, not only on Lady Crowbery's account, who, she feared, was in a very dangerous way, but on her father's also; she declared there was nothing she more dreaded than his interview with Lord Crowbery; his visits there were at all times unpleasant, but much more so on the present occasion, when, she was sure that cruel man would fly out into some violence, and, perhaps, say or do something so very galling to her father's spirit, as might draw him into a serious quarrel; and what then would become of her! the mere possibility of it was terrifying in the extreme.—"Oh! this odious visit," she cried, "wou'd it were well over! I cannot think of it without trembling."

To these tremors and apprehensions Henry applied all the comfort his kind consideration for such generous feelings could suggest: He promised her he would take a horse, and ride over to Crowbery, on the pretence of visiting his friend Ezekiel, but, in fact, to be at hand for any service that occasion might require; he begged her to rest assured that no attention

should be neglected by him, where a life so valuable to her, to himself, and to the world at large, was concerned; but as for any danger personally affecting her father, from the brutal manners of that dastardly Peer, he held that in sovereign disregard; he had seen enough of my Lord to know how far his insolence could go, and where it would stop.—"He would fain," added he "have practised it upon me, when he considered me as a wretched helpless worm, that he might safely tread upon; but no sooner did he see that worm cou'd turn upon him, than he shrunk back like a coward as he is, and in spite of all his pride and haughtiness, lower'd his high tone at the rebuke of a poor friendless being, whom he expected to have crush'd with a word."

This consolation so effectually cheered the filial heart of the grateful Isabella, that she reassumed her spirits, and with a smile, that gave animation to a thousand charms, expressed her thanks with so captivating a grace, that if Henry's heart, assailed by so many interesting sensations at once, was just then in no humour to fulfil its self-denying resolution, some excuse may be fairly offered for his transient infirmity of purpose.—"I'll not leave sight of

the chaise," he said, "either going or returning. If Sir Roger Manstock does not approve of my accompanying him to his interview with Lord Crowbery, nothing shall prevent my being watchful of the issue of it, and attending upon him in every other moment of his absence from you."


"You are infinitely kind and indulgent to my weakness," said Isabella; "and I know your gallant spirit is such, that every thing it protects must be safe; I will therefore dismiss my fears on my father's account;"—then tendering him her hand with a look of modest sweetness and benignity—"Fare you well," she cried, "I shall think them heavy hours till you both return; but I hope we shall have a cheerful meeting at dinner time, and a pleasant walk in the evening."—With these kind words dismiss'd, he was going, when she call'd him back, saying—"One word more before we part: I insist upon your not taking that flighty animal you rode yesterday; and if you will do me a particular favour, you will exercise my mare for me,"—"I shall be in continual terror," replied Henry, "least any accident shou'd befal her."—"Judge then," rejoin'd she, "of me by yourself, and let your fears,

that have such a trifle for their object, give place to mine, that have so much at risque."


"Where am I?" said Henry within himself. "What is become of the resolution I had taken?"



CHAPTER X. Symptoms of falling in Love.
SIR Roger Manstock had no sooner set out, attended by Henry on Isabella's favourite mare, when Zachary Cawdle summoned old Betty to the door, and at that instant recollected a small packet he had in charge from Lady Crowbery, to deliver to her son: vexed at himself for his forgetfulness, he saw no better way of redeeming his neglect, than by putting it into Miss Manstock's hands, requesting her to give it to Henry on his return: he then took his leave, and departed, having a patient or two to visit by the way.
Isabella retired to her chamber; she took up a book, opened it at random, run her eye over two or three pages, and threw it aside; she was not in the humour for reading. Susan

was dispatched for her work-bag; she rummaged it for something to employ herself upon; nothing suited her fancy, though several things presented themselves to her choice; the bag fared no better than the book; both were discarded.

"I am just now," said she to Susan, "in that sort of humour, when one can fix to nothing, and yet I want something to occupy me."—She then began to examine the little packet she had in charge for Henry; she could perceive that it contained a ring; it puzzled her to divine what Lady Crowbery could intend by such a present: she put it into her purse, and for some minutes sat silent and thoughtful; then directing her eyes to Susan, who was employing herself in some arrangements of the toilet, "I am convinc'd," she cried, "that Henry has an excellent heart. I begin to think, Susan, that though it is a very foolish thing to fall in love, and every girl's duty to guard herself against such idle notions, yet in your case, I can suppose, it was hardly to be avoided, where you had so many opportunities of knowing the good qualities of that engaging young man: it is not every body can be content only to admire and

approve a person and character like his."—"I hope, Madam," replied Susan, "you will not think the worse of me for owning that my heart is capable of love."

The conference was now fairly opened; by Susan, with a design to probe the heart of her fair mistress; by Isabella, innocently, incautiously, and with no other motive, but for the present relief of certain new and hitherto unexperienced sensations, of which she neither knew the real nature or extent.
To Susan's frank appeal above recited, she candidly replied—"No, no, I don't altogether condemn you for being capable of love, but I am afraid you have bestow'd your love upon one, who is not susceptible of the like passion: I take Henry to have a mind superior to the weakness of liking any woman, but as a friend."


"To the weakness of liking me in any other light," Susan modestly replied, "he is certainly superior; I know the little services I did him in his distress are rated by him above their value, for he has a grateful and a feeling heart; too generous to treat me with unkindness, too sincere to deceive me with false pretences; for what am I, to aspire to a

person of Mr. Henry's sort, conscious as I am that he is of high birth, with such talents, so accomplish'd, and with so fine a person."—"He has indeed a very fine person," repeated Isabella.—"I have never seen his like," resumed the other.—"But you yourself are very handsome," said the lady, surveying her with a gracious smile.—"I handsome!" said the damsel, affecting a surprise at a compliment, which had been repeated to her a thousand times; "surely, Madam, you are laughing at me; such a clownish girl as I am can have no charms for Mr. Henry".—"Did'n't I tell you," said Isabella, "he had no heart for love?"—"It would he happy for him if he had not," Susan answered; "for I am afraid his love is likely to produce nothing but sorrow and disappointment."

Isabella eagerly demanded what she meant—"Pardon me," replied Susan, "I must not explain myself; neither shou'd I have ventur'd to say a word on the subject, if I cou'd have conceiv'd what was so plain to be seen cou'd have escap'd your notice. I am sure he wou'd be very angry with me, was he to know that I presum'd to hold such discourse with you, Madam; but I shou'd indeed have thought, that of

all persons living you wou'd have been the last to doubt if he had a heart for love. Alas! he only loves too well for his future peace and quiet, and, I fear, he will live to rue the day that ever he came within the walls of Manstock House."


"Heaven in its mercy forbid!" cried Isabella, "that any thing shou'd befal him in this house, that might cause him to regret the coming into it! I am sure, if I am innocently the occasion of it, sooner than be the means of bringing him into misery and misfortune, I wou'd, I wou'd—" Here she faultered, not daring to complete the sentence as her feelings dictated it. The intelligent waiting-woman well understood her embarrassment, and prompted her to a conclusion, which, at the same time, she knew was far short of her meaning.—"You wou'd pity him," she said.—"From my soul," cried the lovely Isabella, with an agitated air and accent; "I wou'd run away and hide myself, if I thought what you allude to was the case, and that my presence gave him pain."—"That can more properly be done on his part," said Susan; "and if I may venture to guess at his fate, that sad remedy will very shortly be resorted

to."—"How so! how so!" exclaimed the fairest of her sex, her fine face glowing with blushes, and the tear of sensibility stealing down her cheek, "is he going from us? I wou'd not have him leave us for the world! what can he see in me, that shou'd frighten him away?"—"Every thing that is lovely and engaging," replied Susan; "that's out of all doubt. But when he sees what he must love, and cannot hope to obtain, if he has one grain of spirit, which I think he does not want, he will escape whilst he can, and not persist to stay, where every hour must render him more fond and more unhappy."

This was a conclusion that Isabella could not parry; it was an inference from her own asserted resolution, which she was not aware of, and could not answer: probably, if Susan had not just then reminded her of that unlucky resolution, she might have been as well pleased; and it is more than probable, had she never let it pass her lips, this was not the very moment she would have chosen for imparting it; it was done, however, and Isabella was not so regardless of consistency as to revoke it; she had made a vow, and vows are too sacred to be sported with; she could be silent, at least, and cut short a

conversation that so pleasingly had led her on into a dilemma so embarrassing; this she could do, and this she did.—"Fetch me my cloak," she cried; "it is time for me to take my walk."

Sir Roger Manstock, in the mean while, followed by Henry on horseback, proceeded rapidly towards Crowbery; arrived there, he entered the castle, whilst Henry struck off towards the cottage on the green, where Ezekiel Daw still sojourned in pious attendance on the dying justice. The good man was at home when Henry rode to the door, and received him with the greeting of a father to his son.—"Welcome, my dear child," cried Ezekiel, as he took him by the hand; "never trust me, but it maketh my heart glad to behold thee. Let it not be a wonder with thee, that I tarry here awhile, till it shall please the Lord to dispose of this wretched creature, languishing on the bed of death, conscience stricken, and wounded in the spirit no less than in the flesh. Thou may'st well believe I have not fail'd to awaken him to a proper sense of his lost and desperate condition: as his returns of reason are but short and rare, I have made the most of them, and set forth the heinousness

of his sins with all due horror, and in its blackest hue. As death hovers over him momentarily, I have prepar'd his ears for the awful sound of the last trump, and the dreadful warning of eternal condemnation. Fain wou'd he have snatch'd at the vain hope of pardon and forgiveness; but I told him not to flatter himself with any such fallacious hopes; and that his offences against man must first be aton'd, before he thought of mercy from God: he appeal'd to his present sufferings, and demanded of me, if I did not think they were punishment sufficient for all the crimes he had meditated or committed. I forbid him to draw any comfort from such false persuasions, reminding him, that mere pains and sickness cou'd not expiate offences; that he was indeed diverted from the perpetration of a murder by a sudden judgment, but it was the hand of Providence, and not his change of purpose, that had frustrated that horrid design; the crime remain'd with him, though the execution of it had been turn'd aside; I advis'd him, therefore, to solicit your forgiveness in the first place."—"He need not doubt of that," cried Henry, with eagerness; "I heartily and from my soul forgive him, and I beseech you so to assure

him."—"Thou speakest, Henry, as it befitteth a Christian to speak; but I much question if these tidings can be imparted to him; by me at least they cannot, seeing I am interdicted from all further visits to him, by one who hath the care of his body, but regardeth not the salvation of his soul. A certain eminent practitioner hath come down from London, to inspect his wounds, and advise in the case. The man is a notable man in his profession, and no less skill'd in pharmacy than surgery; but, alas! he lacketh the one thing needful; for he declaimeth vehemently against my spiritual admonitions, crying out amain, that they depress his pulse, disturb his spirits, and sink him into that despondency, which defeats his efforts, and portendeth death. Thus doth this man of medicine set his face against those wholesome terrors of the Lord, by which we persuade men: but, in truth, this Mr. L—, of whom so much is said for his skill in the management of wounds, regardeth not the doctrine of a wounded conscience, which, probably, he hath no experience in."—Henry smiled: Ezekiel made no stop.—"However, I have taught the sick man that, which has sunk deeper into his brain than the surgeon's

probe can reach; I have sown those seeds in his heart, which the enemy cannot root out; and, I flatter myself, he hath a feeling foretaste of those torments, which are prepar'd for the impenitent sinner in the world to come."


"Alas! alas! my zealous friend," cried Henry, "cou'd you not, in pity to a dying wretch, strike out one spark of comfort from the hope we have in God's all-gracious mercy? Cou'd you preach nothing short of absolute despair? How can a wretch repent, who has no hope of pardon? If you display all hell before his sight, how can he lift his dying eyes towards Heaven? Indeed, indeed, my pious friend, you have been too gloomy in your doctrine."


"And who shall tell me that!" exclaimed Ezekiel, "a boy! a child! a new born babe! Wilt thou reform, correct, reprove my doctrine! thou! Remember the fate of those saucy brats that mock'd at the prophet Elisha; a bear out of the forest devour'd them; I don't say it will be exactly thy fate, for there are no bears in England, I know that well enough; but have a care of a judgment no less; have a

care, I say, young man, how you flout at my doctrine."


"I flout not either at you or your doctrine," replied Henry, "but I compassionate the situation of this unhappy Blachford; and if he feels contrition for his faults, why shou'd he not be cheer'd with hopes of being pardon'd for them?"—"I tell thee, Henry," quoth Ezekiel, his gust of anger being now pretty nearly blown off, "there is not a more deceitful propensity in the heart of man, than what is call'd pity; it is as unlike true charity as it is unlike strict justice; some people have a soft heart, and a watery eye, at every body's command that chuses to apply to them, by which means they are dupes of every knave and impostor, who can put on a crying countenance, and tell a canting tale; but a nature of this cast is only active, when it is spur'd into motion by some interesting spectacle; provoke it not, and it sleeps; mere pity never seeks for employment; it is a virtue of parade and popularity; it searches not for distress, nor follows the sequester'd mourner into his melancholy haunts, to administer the secret charities of consolation and relief; these offices demand a firmer spirit,

nerves better brac'd, and a more manly nature, that can face affliction without whimpering, do its business boldly, and wipe away the widow's tears with a steady hand. What is it to me that a rogue is on his death-bed? he is a rogue no less; and I don't see the charity of sending him out of the world with a lie of my telling, because the truth is unpleasant to him to hear. Blachford has been a tyrant and an oppressor all his life long; he has not felt for others, neither does he now; his feelings are for himself, and if he has any compunction, his fears call it up; it is not voluntary repentance; 'tis the dread of death, the remorse of a thief at the gallows."

Here Ezekiel sung forth in his best key.—"Let us not judge too harshly," cried Henry; "Heaven only knows the hearts of men: we will leave Blachford to his conscience, and turn our thoughts to a more interesting object. Have you any news of the Lady Crowbery?"—"Ah!" said Ezekiel, "I fear there are dark doings in that quarter; she is a prisoner, and, which is worse, she is sick and ill, and has been order'd to Lisbon, if her Lord will let her go thither."—Henry now, with much anxiety, questioned Ezekiel as to

his authority for this intelligence, and found that the London surgeon, who attended Blachford, had been called in by Lord Crowbery, who could no longer shut his eyes against the alarming situation of his Lady, and this gentleman had pronounced a change of climate absolutely necessary, and recommended the air of Lisbon without delay.
The chief object of Sir Roger's visit was thus anticipated, and though the news was painful in the extreme to Henry, yet he drew the consolation from it, of seeing the way smoothed for a peaceable conference between the parties now met at the castle; and it further opened to him a prospect of better opportunities for paying his attentions to his mother, when separated from her tyrant, and in a foreign country, whither he was determined to resort, and at the same time disengage himself from the snares of the too charming object, who had taken such hold of his heart.



CHAPTER XI. An angry Altercation with a Person unknown leads our Hero into imminent Danger.
THESE pious and prudent resolutions of our hero for renouncing his abode at Manstock House, and following his mother to Lisbon, were not taken without a struggle; for all complaints on the part of Lord Crowbery were more effectually avoided by his remaining with Sir Roger, in the absence of the Lady, than by his leaving him, to which it could not fail, but that suspicious conjectures would be affixed. This was a staggering circumstance, and could hardly escape being stated and opposed to him by the hospitable Baronet, nay, perhaps, by Isabella herself, and of her powers of persuasion, should she exert them on the occasion, he had full sense and conviction; neither was it absolute despair, from which he was preparing to retreat; there was no repelling sphere about the lovely person of Isabella; on the contrary, all was attraction there, all was sweetness and smiles; still, native honour, reverence for the feelings of a father, and a due sense of the young heiress's

superior pretensions, held him to his purpose; but, above all other motives, devotion to a suffering mother decided against all temptations.
Ezekiel had left him to these meditations, and was gone to the next door, hoping to find some opportunity of making Blachford acquainted with Henry's forgiveness of his attempt against him. In the mean time a person entered the cottage, whom he recollected to be the finder of Lady Crowbery's ring: though he no longer presented himself in the mean and humble dress he before appeared in, his countenance was pale and sickly, and his frame emaciated, yet there was something noble and impressive in his air and deportment. After the ordinary salutations, he desired to know if there was any message or commission from Lady Crowbery. Henry informed him, that he had nothing of the sort in charge. This was heard with strong expressions of surprize. Some small acknowledgment, he owned, he did expect for his honesty; what did she say upon the delivery of it? She took it, and said nothing, was the answer.—"Impossible!" exclaim'd the disappointed stranger; "Lady Crowbery would not receive it in that stile; such indifference

is totally out of character; it exceeds all credibility. Suffer me," he added, very seriously, "to desire you will be pleas'd to recollect yourself; any one word you can call to mind, as utter'd by her on that occasion, will be of moment to me; consult your memory, I beseech of you; perhaps it may have slipt you in the hurry of your thoughts; nay, it is possible, being so small an article, you may have forgotten to deliver it."—"How, Sir!" exclaimed Henry, sternly fixing his eyes upon him.—The man paid little regard to this angry interjection, but went on with his discourse, observing, that it was nothing extraordinary if the memory of a young man should fail him in a commission not very interesting.

"I stand in need of no apologies," replied our hero, "for defect of memory; I am clear in what I tell you, and having once asserted it, shall repeat it no more, nor patiently submit, that any question should be made of my veracity."—"You talk loftily, young Sir," said the stranger; "and before we proceed any further in this kind of altercation, it will be proper for me to clear up some preliminary points between us, that may else involve you in a mistake you may repent of. Appearances,

I presume, have deceiv'd you; from what I said to you at our last meeting, when I confided to you the ring, you doubtless consider'd me as a needy abject man, and yourself, then newly taken into favour by Lady Crowbery, as my superior; before you suit your conversation to that idea, I must forewarn you, that you are talking with a gentleman."


"I am sorry for it," replied Henry; "as I cannot put up with those suspicions from a gentleman, which, in a vulgar person, I shou'd have disregarded: you talk'd to me of being return'd from transportation, and in such a man it was an unexpected merit to restore the property he had found; but what can a gentleman require more, than the satisfaction of knowing, that the owner of the ring is in possession of what she had lost? This you are now inform'd of, and you must prepare your mind, before we part, to dismiss every shadow of doubt, that I could possibly be guilty of a false report."


"Hold," replied the other, "I cou'd never in my life regulate my thoughts at the word of command; and if you mean to make them accord to your wishes, you must give me some leading aids towards conviction of your sincerity, before I can repose implicit faith in

it: the word, that pledges the honour of a gentleman to me, I shall not dispute; I am ready, to acquiesce in it; but I am not willing to make a tender of my confidence to a person, who exacts such high demands upon me, until I am convinc'd he is entitled so to do; let us, therefore, interchange explanations with each other, before you require, or I render, satisfaction for what you seem to treat as an affront. Inform'd as I am, I am to consider you as a child of fortune, newly emerg'd from the lowest state of human wretchedness; your looks, your language and demeanour, certainly are not those of a mean uneducated person; give me therefore your name, condition and pretensions, and I will give you mine; then, if you tell me Lady Crowbery has receiv'd the ring I sent her by your hands, and treated it as a bawble not worthy her remembrance, and the sender of it as an object not deserving her enquiry, I think I must be compell'd, hard as it will be even then, to say that I believe you."

Our Henry's candour saw the reasonableness of this stipulation, and the dilemma was a very awkward one to which he was reduced by it; sensible that he could not justly press his requisitions any further, yet unwilling to submit

to the indignity of being doubted—"I am not at liberty," he replied "to give you the information you require; I must leave you, therefore, to draw your own conclusions, and we must part, as we met, strangers to each other. Your disappointment about the ring certainly has an anxiety in it, that goes deeper than to the mere fact of my delivering it or not to the Lady Crowbery; but whatever my curiosity on that account may be, I have no right to be inquisitive as to your secrets, so long as I withhold my own. When you appeal to the Lady, you will find I have told you truth; but I did not recollect to tell you, that she never saw the ring I gave her; it was wrapt in paper, and she, being in haste, put it into her pocket without examination; if then there is any mystery about it, and mere was annexed to it, than as a common trinket dropt from her finger, you have the satisfaction of knowing there was no time for her to develope it, neither have I set eyes on her since."


"It is enough," exclaimed the stranger; "I am satisfied, completely satisfied, and ask your pardon for my hesitation in giving credit to you: had you told me this at first, I shou'd not have express'd myself as I did."

Anger, which in Henry's bosom had no

lasting tenure, instantly disappeared upon this apology, and he began to explain as much of his own history as was proper to be told. This was attentively listened to by his companion, who owned having been betrayed into wrong notions, as to his connection with Lady Crowbery, report having stated to him, that her Lord was jealous of her on his account, and not without grounds—"these you have now," added he, "very naturally accounted for, and 'tis too clear, that the man is by nature a suspicious tyrant, and that he uses her most harshly: Alas! poor Lady, how I pity her hard lot; but how, in the name of wonder, cou'd she ever consent to join herself to such a husband, whose person she cou'd not like, and whose manners cou'd never have been suitable to a woman of her taste and elegance? I am not acquainted with Lord Crowbery, but I have had a glimpse of his person, and some traits of his character; I own I cou'd not have suppos'd Cecilia Adamant, one of the richest heiresses, and most accomplish'd young women of her time, wou'd have condescended to the proposals of such a suitor."—Henry said, he supposed it was a match of her father's making, and such marriages, he observed, were not apt to be happy.


"I can readily believe," replied the stranger, "that her father forced this odious Lord upon her; for, if I am rightly inform'd of Sir Andrew's character, he was capable of some violence, and not very well dispos'd to consult his daughter's inclinations; she, perhaps, might yield to his authority, and consent to be miserable for life, rather than disobedient in any one act of it. From my soul I compassionate her! And now she is dropping into a decline, and must go to Lisbon; this I gather from the person himself, who advis'd it: mark, therefore, the issue of these matches of compulsion. What has not that parent to answer for, who forces a child, against the natural bent of her affection, into the arms of a man, whom her heart revolts from! But it is a painful subject, and we will say no more on it."


"Agreed!" cried Henry, rising from his seat; "let us dismiss this melancholy topic; besides, my time is expir'd, and I have business I must now attend to."


END OF BOOK THE FIFTH.



BOOK THE SIXTH.

CHAPTER I. The Author hints at a Reform in the Constitution of a Novel.
IT is my wish to devote these short prefatory Essays to our fraternity of Novelists, if haply my good will can strike out any thing for their use and profit; it is, therefore, in the friendly spirit of criticism, that I protest against a practice, which some few of the corps have lately taken up, of adulterating their compositions with a dash of politics, which I conceive to be a kind of fraud upon their customers, that not only brings disgrace and loss upon themselves individually, but is injurious to the trade in general. I shall not point out the particular offenders, as they are sufficiently noted by those, who have read their productions; and, if they have but wisdom enough to reform, I should be loth that past errors should be remembered to the prejudice of their future fortune.

I trust, they need not be told, that there are clubs and coffee houses in this free country, where nonsense may be talked with impunity; but it is a serious risque to print it. Round their own fire-sides their zeal may boil over without scalding their fingers; but when they cater for the public, they should be warned how they mix up any such inflammatory materials, as temperate stomachs will not bear; our only aim should be to refresh our friendly visitors with an exhilarating wholesome draught, not to disturb their reason with an intoxicating nauseous drug.
All that I am bound to do as a story-maker is, to make a story; I am not bound to reform the constitution of my country in the same breath, nor even (Heaven be thanked!) to overturn it, though that might be the easier task of the two, or, more properly speaking, one and the same thing in its consequences. Nature is my guide; man's nature, not his natural rights: the one ushers me by the straitest avenue to the human heart, the other bewilders me in a maze of metaphysics.
Doubtless, it becomes the gentle nature of a female votary of the Muse, and of every author soft as females, to let no occasion slip

for making public such their amiable propensity, through every channel that the press affords; the poor African is therefore fair game for every minstrel that has tuned his lyre to the sweet chords of pity and condolence; whether he builds immortal verse upon his loss of liberty, or weaves his melancholy fate into the pathos of a novel, in either case he finds a mine of sentiment, digs up enthusiasm from its richest vein, and gratifies at once his spleen and his ambition. The happy virtuous negro, torn from his own fine temperate climate, and transported into the torrid heats of our inhospitable islands, there to sweat and bleed beneath the lash of barbarous task-masters, inspires so fine a rhapsody, and gives so touching a display of British cruelty, that, against the force of truth, the unguarded reader credits it, and blushes for the country that he lives in. No matter that the world at large bears testimony to the charities of our land, to her magnanimity, her honour, her benevolence; though thousands of the persecuted sufferers for conscience sake fly to Britain as the universal philanthropist, in whose arms there is a sure asylum for the wretched, still the degrading fiction bears down truth; black troops of savages are raised

to cast the nation's character in shade; the African lives free and happy under the mild government of his native princes; he never licks the dust in their presence, nor loads the gibbet to adorn their palaces, and, though snatched from death by his purchaser, yet not emancipated from slavery by his employer, he must be taught to murmur, and the sigh, which he cannot draw from his own bosom, must be inspired into him by the breath of others, till urged by these incendiary condolences, he shakes off his contentment, rises terrible in his enthusiasm, and, though redeemed from death by those whom he destroys, sates himself with carnage, and ripping forth the heart of his benefactor, shows the trophy of his freedom, and gloriously asserts the Rights of Man. Cast your eyes towards those blood-besprinkled islands, which ye have conspired to illuminate, ye merciful reformers, and glory in your doctrines, if your consciences will let you. I blush to think, that folly can effect such mischief.
A fast friend to the interests of the press, and a great authority in point, who vends our wares to the amount of one hundred thousand volumes annually (Heaven augment his little

modicum of trade!) ingenuously acquaints us with those honest arts, by which he rose to eminence so justly earned; of these, one trifling requisite, amongst many more noble acquirements, he mentions to be, that of keeping himself always pretty well informed of the state of politics in Europe, not exactly by the reading of novels, nor purposely for the writing of them, but for reasons much more wise and weighty, namely, because he has always found, that bookselling is much affected by the political state of affairs. May the secrets of all the cabinets in Europe be ever open to a politician, who makes so good an use, and draws such worthy profit from his information; and I would to Heaven, those wrong headed zealots of our fraternity above alluded to, had his political knowledge for our edification, or would copy his prudence for their own amendment.
This experienced personage further observes, that the best time for bookselling is, when there is no kind of news stirring: it is a little mortifying, I must own, but his authority is conclusive, for he tells us, that then many of those, who for months would have done nothing but talk of war or peace, revolutions and counter-revolutions,

&c. &c. for want of other amusement, will have recourse to books. If this observation be true, (and who can doubt that men love talking better than reading?) the author's golden age is that of public tranquillity; how ill then does he employ his talents, who, instead of exerting them for the peace and quiet of mankind, turns them to the purposes of discontent, of revolutions and counter-revolutions, writing the world into such a temper, that no readers are left in it? The true patriot in the republic of letters is he, who, in times of war and tumult, can so write as to invite the world's attention to his peaceful studies, and divert it from its sanguinary politics; the incendiary author, on the contrary, is a fool and a felo de se.
If men, therefore, have so little disposition towards the purchasing of books, when there is so much news stirring abroad, let him, who writes at such a moment, give double diligence to what he writes; let him so manage it as to contrast the taedium of the politician's task, and not revolt him with a double dose of what he is weary of. Strong efforts will succeed, when feeble ones must fail; novelty and surprize will ever attract admiration, the most enchusiastic passion of the human mind;

and though the philosophy of Rome cried it down, Plato himself confesses it to have been the moving spring of the philosophy of Greece.
Here then we discern the proper province of works of fiction; for novelty and surprise (as Bishop Warburton defines them) are the inseparable attendants of imposture; and the very time, when strong attractions are required to draw men to their books, is the time for such productions to appear, and the strength of their attraction will depend upon the writer's care and talents. Now, though novelty and surprise are what we aim to treat our readers with, we are no otherwise impostors, than those fair-dealing jugglers are, who candidly warn their spectators before hand, that their tricks are nothing more than mere slight of hand, the effect of nimble art and practised adroitness, by which they cheat the sight, but aim not to impose upon the understanding; like them, the Novelist professes to deal in ingenious deceptions, but deceptions so like truth and nature, that whilst his performances have all the vivacity of a romance to excite admiration, they have the harmony of a history to engage approbation. Monsters, and prodigies,

and every species of unnatural composition are not to be admitted into a novel, for these tend only to raise wonder in the ignorant and superstitious, and are a sort of black art, now universally exploded. A writer of romances, in the present age, cannot make so free with the credulity of his readers, as Herodotus or even Livy did with their's, though profest historians.
A novel may be considered as a dilated comedy; its plot therefore should be uniform, and its narrative unbroken: episode and digression are sparingly, if at all, to be admitted; the early practice of weaving story within story should be avoided; the adventures of the Man of the Hill, in the Foundling, is an excrescence that offends against the grace and symmetry of the plot: whatever makes a pause in the main business, and keeps the chief characters too long out of sight, must be a defect. In all histories, whether true or fictitious, the author cannot too carefully refrain from speaking in his own person, and this is yet another reason to be added to those already given, why political discussions should never be admitted in a novel, as they are sure to be set down to the author's account, let him assign

them as he will. It is not necessary that the leading character of a novel should be honest and amiable, but it is indispensible it should be interesting and entertaining; and every writer, who wishes to endear man to man by pleasing pictures of human nature, or, in other words, by presenting virtuous characters in amiable lights, will let the good preponderate over the evil; he will not take his maxims from Rochfoucault, nor shape his fellow-creatures after the models of Hobbes or Swift; the spirit of the author will be seen in the general moral and tendency of the piece, though he will allot to every particular character its proper sentiment and language; the outline will be that of nature, and fancy will dispose the group into various attitudes and actions, but the general colouring and complexion of the whole will reflect the peculiar and distinguishing tints of the master.



CHAPTER II. A terrible Encounter, in which our Hero is totally discomfited.
WHILST our hero had been occupied at the cottage, Sir Roger had concluded his conference with Lord Crowbery. Nature had endowed the worthy Baronet with an evenness of temper, that was a great sheather for the ill humours of those he had to deal with. On this occasion, however, matters passed better than he had laid his account for; not that the conversation went off without some mutterings on the part of the Peer, but they were such as rather shewed his sullenness than ferocity.
The reception given to Henry at Manstock House was touched upon, with a kind of contemptuous sneer at the weakness of Sir Roger for admitting such a guest.—"But perhaps," added my Lord ironically, "you find all those charms in his elegant society that my Lady your niece did; or, if you yourself don't immediately discover them, your fair daughter perhaps may, for prejudices are apt to run in

families; and, I dare say the young gentleman well knows how to profit by such prejudices; but you, no doubt, have weighed these matters well before you made an inmate of him."

Sir Roger, who was no dealer in side speeches and insinuations, took little notice of this trash, and turned the subject to his niece's illness. My Lord replied, that she was certainly much indisposed, for which, in fact, she had to thank herself; that for his own part he had done, and should continue to do, every thing in his power for her recovery; change of climate had been suggested to him, and by authority he was much inclined to defer to. His neighbour Blachford had called down a very eminent surgeon from London, and he had taken his advice in Lady Crowbery's case; it was the very Mr. L—, who had made so wonderful a cure of Sir George Revel, after his duel with Arundel in Flanders.—"I confess to you," said the Peer, "I am charm'd with him; he talks to the understanding, and I comprehend what he means; but he will not let us decide on what he recommends without a reference to the faculty, and it seems we are to have a consultation of physicians in London,

who are either to pass their patient on to Lisbon, or revoke the voyage, and take other measures; so the matter stands at present; but if you wish to see your niece, she will give you fuller information."

Sir Roger said; it was what he much wished and notice being given to Lady Crowbery, he was instantly and gladly admitted. To his great surprise, he was suffered to be alone with her; the moments were precious, and she availed herself of them for putting a packet into his hands, containing her will, and other important papers, the seal of which he was not to break but upon the event of her death.

"You will find," she said, "that I have made provision for this unprotected youth, whom Ratcliffe's death has thrown upon my care; and if your candour ever shall be shaken by the vile reports, that have been rais'd against my fame, you'll see so full a confutation of them in that paper, that, however they may affect me living, dead, they cannot rest upon my memory. Whether my Lord believ'd what he took pains to propagate I'll not pretend to say, but now at least I can no longer be an object for his jealousy, and, to do

him justice, I must own he has relax'd much of his severity, which happy change I am indebted for to the good offices of the gentleman, who has been call'd in upon my case: I see that he compassionates my sufferings, and I've reason to believe he guesses at the cause of them; I am told, he has had long sittings with my Lord, and it is clear that he has gain'd an influence over his bad humours, of which I happily experience the effects, witness the present moments I enjoy with you; but we'll make prudent use of them, and not trespass on indulgence so precarious. Farewell; if I am destin'd to Lisbon, and my Lord allows of it, I hope that we shall meet once more."—Thus ended this affecting interview, Sir Roger parting with a heavy heart, encharged with many kind remembrances to Isabella and to Henry.
Our hero, who had kept watch upon Sir Roger's departure, joined him as he came out of Lord Crowbery's gate, and, when he was clear of the park, at his request, got into the chaise, and gave his mare to one of the servants. Sir Roger's spirits were sensibly affected, and it was some time before they were sufficiently recovered for him to enter upon a recital of what had passed, and a description of the state, in which he found Lady Crowbery: it was not,

however, his manner to paint in strong colours, so that all which Henry collected from this description was, that his niece looked very ill, and was much altered since he had seen her last: of his interview with my Lord he simply observed, that it was a disagreeable job well over; he was a man, he said, in whose company he was never at his ease; he dealt too much in dark hints and side blows to please him, who had no taste for any talk but what went right onwards to the point before it.—"There is no proscription, however, against you," said the Baronet; "and if there was, perhaps I shou'd not have regarded it, for I am too old to be dictated to in that style, and told what company I am to keep. He is pleas'd to be considerate of my repose, and wou'd not be sorry to make me as jealous of my Isabella on your account, as he pretends to be of his own lady; but I can assure you, Henry, such absurdities make no impression upon me, and I desire you will take no notice of it to my daughter. 'Tis true, Henry, you are a handsome fellow, and, I hope, in proper time, some honest girl may be of the same opinion, and make a man of you; but if my heart never aches till Isabella is in the fault of it, sorrow and I shall never be acquainted

more. Apropos to that," added the Baronet with an encouraging smile, "here is my friend Claypole's niece coming to us this very day; Fanny is a fine girl, and, between you and me, has a hawk's eye at a handsome fellow; if you mind your hits, who knows what may come of it? She has a very pretty independency, I can promise you."—"And I am a beggar," said Henry.—"Not so, not absolutely so," replied Sir Roger; "I have that in my hands, which will keep off beggary at least. I don't promise, nor wou'd I have you expect, any great matters; but I have my niece's word for saying you are remember'd in her will, and that will is in my keeping, so you won't be beholden to a wife for the bread that you eat, as some folks are."

Henry was high-minded enough in conscience, and there were few people from whom he would have relished this kind of discourse; but he took the Baronet in his own way, and contented himself with observing, that he was ill-qualified for a fortune hunter, for he should be as scrupulous with respect to the good qualities of a wife, and as indifferent to her money, as if he had the fortune of a prince in possession.


〈1 page duplicate〉



〈1 page duplicate〉


They were now entering the avenue that opened to the house, when Henry, suspecting that Isabella might be upon the look-out, and alarmed with the sight of a led-horse, begged leave to stop the chaise and get out. The measure was a considerate one, for his presentiment was verified by the sight of that young lady walking towards them up the avenue: he galloped onwards, and greeting her with the good tidings, that all was well, stopt his career, and leapt to the ground in an instant of time; in the same instant joy illuminated her bright eyes, and glowed on her cheeks.
Oh! all ye Loves and Graces, what were you doing at that moment to make your favourite, already mistress of poor Henry's heart, so irresistibly alluring, and why thus league yourselves in mighty combination against one weak son of nature, unhappily too sensitive for his repose? Why meet him, lovely Isabella, with that magic sweetness, those alluring smiles, and, to a form so beauteous add those charms, that would have recommended homeliness itself—the nymph-like robe tucked up above the instep, locks loose and flowing, quick breath, and panting bosom?—Why must every wind conspire to unveil new beauties to his

sight, and why too must that cunning painter, exercise, heighten the bright carnation of your cheeks to such a dazzling hue, that the admiring eye could not behold its lustre, without betraying the emotions of the heart? Is this fair dealing, tempter? Goddesses, ye should have mercy, and remember that my hero is but a mortal.


CHAPTER III. Our Hero is led towards a Discovery highly interesting.
WE left our hero, at the close of the foregoing chapter, like the son of Tydeus in the fields of Troy, contending with the immortals: if in that encounter any lady got a wound of Henry's giving, we, who must be tried by modern rules of honour, not by ancient lore, will be the last to boast of it; certain it is, that Isabella stept into the carriage, and took her seat there, with an agility that argued the free use of all her limbs; neither did she fly to her father, as her fair prototype Venus did to Jupiter, to murmur and complain

of the audacious mortal who assailed her; on the contrary, she parted with him in peace, caressed the favourite steed on which he rode, and, as she mounted the chariot, accepted his assisting hand; from all which we infer, that Isabella came heart-whole out of the fray, or, at worst, with no such visible injury as could impeach the manhood of our hero. He, on the other hand, whether disabled by some secret wound, or from whatever cause, attempted not to vault into the saddle with his usual glee, but slowly pacing under shelter of the trees with horse in hand, unfolded the small packet Isabella had delivered to him, and taking out the contents, which Zachary's carelessness had neglected to give, read as follows—
Accept this ring: it was my gift to your father; the pledge of love and constancy: the person, who pretends to have found it, either is Delapoer himself, or can inform you of his fate.

"'Tis Delapoer himself," cried Henry; "'tis he! How cruel is this disappointment! How perverse, vexatious, and unpardonable the negligence of Zachary! and what fatal consequences might have follow'd from our altercation

in the cottage! Heaven and Earth! I might have been the murderer of my father! my blood chills at the reflection! Three times I have met him, and each time, save once, have treated him with sullen disrespect. O Nature, where were those secret workings we are told of; where that sympathy of souls, that instinct, to impel us to each other? 'Tis plain why he disguis'd himself; he came to spy the land, to hover round the spot, where his first love was planted: he knew the rumour of Lord Crowbery's jealousy; nay, he confess'd he did, and (oh strange involution of unnatural circumstances!) accused me in his heart of incest with a mother. Monstrous perversion of ideas! by what horrors have I been unknowingly encompass'd! by what providence have I escap'd! He must be Delapoer; he must be the unconscious author of my mysterious birth. Where shall I seek him now? No matter! I will ransack the whole island ere I renounce the search. He said he was a gentleman; 'twas truly said! for when I rous'd him into wrath, his pale and sickly cheeks caught fire, and his eyes witness'd to the highborn spirit of a noble gentleman. Thank

Heaven! we parted not in anger, but in peace."

Thus venting his sad thoughts aloud, he sauntered towards the house; and, there arrived, betook himself to his chamber, deposited the sacred pledge securely, and was summoned from his meditations to the task of dress by the tolling of the bell, which solemnly announced the arrival of a numerous party of visitors to the hospitable house of Manstock: these visitors, who were of the first respect in the county, came uninvited; but though Sir Roger's liberal stile of furnishing his board defied surprise, his table was not proof against their numbers, so that Henry, who was late in his appearance, shaped his course aside from the main body, and attached himself to a supplemental table, where sate a young officer in a captain's naval uniform, whose open countenance and easy manners soon unlocked restraint, and put both parties at their mutual ease.

"Jack," cried Sir Roger, addressing himself to the Captain, "that gentleman is a friend of mine, I recommend him to your care, and you to his; I pray you waste no ceremony in

being known to each other."—"Enough said, uncle," quoth the Captain, and tendered his hand to Henry.
Gallant, congenial hearts, how quick ye harmonise and are attuned together!
This officer, Cary by name, was nephew to Sir Roger, and youngest of five sons, which his sister had borne to Sir Nicholas Cary, deceased. He was in person short, but of athletic mould, hard favoured in his features, which, though they could boast no beauty, made ample compensation by a strong display of candour and benevolence; they needed not a herald to proclaim—"this is an honest, brave, well temper'd man; him you may trust without a pledge, and take into your heart without a trial."—He was a prime favourite with his uncle, of which he had received many unequivocal proofs at times when pay run short, and prize money did not come in; and this very day had greeted his eyes with the Baronet's name at the foot of an order for an hundred pounds, together with an excellent time-keeper, presented to him by the fair hands of his cousin Isabella, which Claypole, who was a great martinette in things of that sort, had procured for her in London for

this very purpose. Captain Cary had lately been made post into a frigate, as a reward for his gallant behaviour in an action with the enemy, when he had command of a cutter; in this frigate he was now hovering upon the eastern coast for the purpose of collecting some prest men to complete his complement. His presence spread joy through the whole family; every one of the old servants, in their turns, made an errand to the side table, which was soon overloaded with their offerings, for none came empty handed, and it had been a vain attempt to think of checking their good will; none went away without a kind word; and in all these manoeuvres Henry discovered such a flow of heart on both sides, that before many minutes had gone by, he and Cary had hatched a friendship for each other, which some bosoms would have taken as many years to brood upon without the same effect.

"I am going to sea in a whiff," said Cary to our hero; "but I was determin'd to snap a sight of my uncle and Isabella, if it was in my power, and consistent with the service: I have now brought my ship to an anchor, by order of my superiors, and shall be off tomorrow by peep of day".—Henry asked how

long it would be before he left the coast, and how far off his station was?—Two hours smart riding might carry him to it, and in five or six days, at most, he expected to take his departure.—"I know," added he, "that my destination is to Lisbon; 'tis a pleasant trip, and if you have a mind to volunteer with me so far, I'll give you the best welcome that my accommodations admit of, and thank you for your company."

An opportunity so tempting, and a companion so much to Henry's taste, were not to be slighted; it accorded so critically with the project he had in mind, and so fully met his wishes, that he told Cary in a whisper, he would talk with him farther upon it in another place; and if a certain event came to pass as he expected, he should most thankfully embrace his kind proposal, and esteem himself happy in carrying a musquet on his quarter deck, under so gallant a commander. Henry, for reasons best known to himself, spoke this in so low a voice, that it may be presumed he wished it not to be overheard at the other table: whether it was or was not, time, perhaps, may shew; but there was a glance just then directed towards him from a certain person who there presided,

which had a great deal of tender intelligence in its expression, and, we are apt to believe, though it sounds paradoxical to say it, that the sensation it created in him was at once both pleasurable and painful.
There was another person at table, though at some distance from the sender of the glance in question, who was not idle or indifferent in the intimations, which her eyes occasionally condescended to bestow upon our hero. This was none other than Fanny Claypole herself, the niece of Sir Roger's reverend friend, and whom, as the reader may probably recollect, the worthy Baronet had charactered as an accurate observer of beauty in the male sex, and not unkindly disposed, as it now seemed, towards Henry, who possessed it in such high perfection. She was seated between her uncle and Sir Roger, but to the attention she paid to either of them, or to any thing passing round or upon the table, she might as well have been in another planet. Henry had all her notices, and nobody any share of her conversation. Her particular location as a spectatress of what was to her so interesting a phenomenon was as happy as good fortune could make it, for there was nothing to cut the line of vision between

her eyes and the object they were engaged upon, and those eyes, which were truly very communicative, sent such plain-speaking messages every now and then, that Henry must have been duller than the fat weed on Lethe's brink not to have read their meaning; even Cary himself, who was not over-critical in this kind of language, wanted not the help of his sea-glasses to spy it out—"Look to," he cried, whispering Henry in the ear, "by the lord, volunteer, there's a signal out for you to come on board the Fanny sloop of war: launch away, my brave fellow, for you'll have warm work when the decks are clear'd."

Henry smiled, and said nothing; but the prediction was not a whit the less true for his disregard of it; for no sooner was the cloth removed, and grace pronounced by the Reverend Mr. Claypole, than Fanny began her manoeuvres, and having introduced a chair between herself and uncle, she beckoned Henry to her, and with a hitch that edged Mr. Claypole considerably out of the line, brought her prize close alongside of her, to the infinite delight of Cary, who calmly seated himself in a more envied place, beside his cousin Isabella.

Next to absolute privacy, nothing is so favourable to a determined tête-a-tête as a large company; Fanny seemed aware of this, for she devoted her regards entirely to her next neighbour. She possessed in a very eminent degree those graces and qualifications, which are more properly styled allurements than beauties, and attract more lovers than they fix; she had besides the art of arranging her forces in the best way possible for her own purposes, and suffering none to be idle in her service, made up by discipline what she wanted in numbers; she might, however, be fairly called a very pretty woman, dressed with a becoming negligence, and talked with a familiar ease; with a ready flow of words ever at command, she had a vivacity that might pass for wit, and a raillery that resembled humour; she was quick to apprehend all meanings that a word could carry, and not afraid to shew, that she both apprehended and applied them; she was, in short, an admirable actress, and never more so than when she affected to look modest and demure.
It was not the habit of Sir Roger's house for the ladies to sit long after dinner, and as Isabella naturally concluded that the gentlemen

now present had come upon county business, she was the quicker in her motions, and, to the sensible regret of Fanny Claypole, broke up the female part of the assembly, and left the stage entire to the lords of the creation.


CHAPTER IV. County Politics debated over a Bottle.
WHAT Isabella had surmised was true: one of the county members lay at the point of death, and Sir Roger's visitors, who were the leading men of the opposite parties, had united in referring themselves to the worthy Baronet as a middle man, and acceptable to both, for the sake of preserving peace in the county, and preventing a contest, which, from the state and temper of parties, seemed to be inevitable, unless he could be prevailed upon to step in upon the vacancy. This had been so often tried before, and his aversion from the undertaking was so well known, that though they came upon him in great strength, and as it were by surprise, yet they rather

laid their account for a hard-fought battle than an easy victory.
One of their junto, an elderly gentleman, and much respected, was Sir Roger's particular friend; he was accordingly put forward as their spokesman in the opening of this business; he acquitted himself of the task in a manner that did credit to their choice; he appealed to those passions, in which he knew his friend was most assailable, the spirit of patriotism, and the pride of being marked as the preserver of the public peace. Sir Roger, in plain words and few, made his hearty acknowledgments for the great honour conferred upon him, candidly stated his unfitness for the office to which they invited him, and humbly solicited to be excused from undertaking it—"My age," said the good man, "my habits of life, my attachment to the quiet character of a country gentleman, disqualify me for the active duties you would lay upon me. I love my country, it is true, and, in my small sphere, do all the good I can amongst my neighbours, but in the politics of the state I am as ignorant as a child."—"For that reason we appeal to you," said one of the gentlemen, who was of an opposite, interest to the last speaker; "to your honour and impartial

judgment, unconnected with party, and unbiass'd by politics, we would fain delegate this important trust, and in your nomination only all voices will unite; you alone can keep us all in harmony and good fellowship, and, I flatter myself that Sir Roger Manstock, as a lover of peace, will not refuse to his friends and neighbours their conciliating petition, tho' it may be at the expence of some small share of his repose."

Sir Roger said truly he was no adept in politics, neither was he versed in shifts and evasions, which we take to be an inferior branch of the same science; where his conscience, as in the present case, could not stand by him, wit never came to his assistance; in short, he was a good man and a bad orator; these arguments, therefore, which pushed right forwards at his heart he could not parry, and whilst he was thus balancing the pro and the con in silence, Cary, who saw the conflict, and which side his honour ought to take, filled his glass, and cried aloud—"Come, uncle, let us drink, 'Peace at home and victory abroad;' if you'll preserve the one, we'll struggle to obtain the other." This lucky start of gaiety was pledged by all present, and Sir Roger seemed to be

carrying his election very fast against his will; one hope only remained, and that was centered in his friend Mr. Claypole, who hitherto had fate, with a neutrality of countenance, in perfect silence. He was a cool, deep-thinking man, and one on whose opinions Sir Roger reposed a very catholic faith; when he found himself invited to speak by a certain look, which his friend in doubt directed to him, and saw all other eyes upon him at the same time, and evidently with the same expectations, he delivered himself with much gravity, as follows:—

"I am so inconsiderable a person in this company, and have so little right to speak upon the point in question, that I should naturally have been silent, had not my respected friend signified to me by his looks that my poor opinion would not be unwelcome or impertinent; I say, gentlemen, I should be without excuse for uttering a word on this subject, but for Sir Roger's wish that I should do so, and your encouragement in giving ear to me; I shall not, however, abuse your indulgence by going put of my line, which certainly has nothing to do with parliamentary matters, but shall simply submit to my friend's consideration what my conscience obliges me to recommend

as a minister of peace, and a well wisher to the good order of society. The monstrous excesses and gross enormities of a contested election are seriously to be deplor'd, and every worthy means for preventing them have my hearty concurrence; how then can I withhold my approbation from the means now proposed, which, having for their object a person so worthy, cannot fail to be worthy in themselves? It has been my happiness to live in the closest intimacy with my friend here present for many years, and, if Heaven sees fit to add others to them, I pray that it may continue to me that blessing also; I can boast therefore that I know him well; but what of that? you know him also, as your present application testifies, and know him pre-eminently deserving of the honours you would fain confer upon him; I therefore join my humble suit to your's, that he would be pleased to accept them; and this I do, not unconscious of the sacrifice he must make of many comforts, nor even indifferent to the loss which I myself must suffer by his absence, because I cannot bring myself to put the sacrifice of any one man's peace, least of all the sacrifice of my own, into the balance against the peace of many."


The reverend speaker ceased, and Sir Roger had no more to do but to signify his assent, and take up his burthen with the best grace he could. The victory was complete, and he glass began to circulate to the health of the Baronet; Captain Cary was in the chair, and the very soul of good fellowship; the wine was excellent, the company in high good humour, and Sir Roger's courage began to rally; he had now his joke at his nephew Jack, and a whisper for Henry at his elbow, which intimated to him, that his prediction about Fanny was in a fair course to be made good; in short, there was no one present who did not seem to sympathise in the festivity of the moment.
When the gentlemen negotiators were three parts tipsey, and their servants entirely so, they set out, at the risque of their necks, towards their respective homes. Henry and the Captain joined the ladies in the drawing-room, whilst Sir Roger, according to custom, exercised himself with a walk up and down the great hall with his friend Claypole: though a man in general of few words, he was just now in a talking vein, and having gently tapped the parson on the shoulder as if to bespeak attention, he began as follows:—


"Well, my good friend, these gentlemen have carried their point, with your assistance, and I am in a fair train to find myself, where I never expected to be found, a mute member in the British senate, and the unworthy representative of this great country. Pr'ythee, Claypole, what do'st think that I can do in that place? a pretty figure I shall make; a mere country putt, amongst wits, lawyers, orators and politicians. I may perhaps be able to say aye or no, but good chance if I do not say it, like Sir Francis Wronghead, sometimes in the wrong place."


"No fear of that," quoth Claypole; "if all were speakers that sit in parliament, our House of Commons would be a mere club of spouters. The assent or dissent of an honest and right-judging country gentleman will never be a matter of indifference."


"Why, truly," said the Baronet, "speech-making has not been in vogue with my family for many years past; not but there have been those heretofore who could do it, and roundly too; we have a record of my ancestor Sir Thomas Manstock, in 1566, making a flaming speech in the Commons to constrain Queen Bess to marry or appoint a successor;

he was a bold man, and call'd her a faint hearted woman in the face of the House, for which, by the way, she tweak'd his nose in the face of the Court, and call'd him cuckold. It was scurvy treatment, and, I am apt to think, gave the orator a surfeit, that has run in the blood ever since; for all our generations in descent from Sir Thomas have been as mute as fishes to the present day."


"Well, Sir Roger," said Claypole, "there have been times since those of Elizabeth, when taciturnity was a good family qualification, and that same royal tweak of the nose may have been the means of keeping some heads upon their shoulders: after all, it must be own'd, it was a rough way her Majesty took of snubbing the good man Sir Thomas, and what few old maids in the like case wou'd have done; but match-making for crown'd heads is a ticklish business,"—"For any heads," added, Sir Roger; "and tho' a matter of that sort may, for aught I know, be going on at this very moment under our noses, I shall keep mine at least out of danger, as I shou'd be loth to have it tweak'd, even by the fair fingers of Fanny Claypole."

This was a hit that Claypole had not quite

given his friend credit for, and it was at least a proof to him that his own remarks had not been singular; for he argued rightly enough, that if Sir Roger had spied it out, nobody could have overlooked it; he thought it best therefore to treat it in the same strain, between jest and earnest, and observed in reply, that Fanny was a free-hearted girl, and her own mistress.—"She is out of my hands," said he; "so shou'd not I be out of her's with a whole skin, if I was to play the part of Sir Thomas Manstock, and dictate to her on the subject of matrimony. Henry is a fine fellow, it must be confess'd, and it is no impeachment to her taste that she likes him; if, therefore, she is resolv'd to make him a present of fifteen thousand pounds and her fair person, much good may it do him; I can't gainsay it."—"And if it was to come to that," said Sir Roger, "it might not, perhaps, be the very worst thing she could do: I have a very high opinion of Henry, and tho' we are in the dark about his p
•
rents, I would risque a wager that my niece Crowbery knows him to be a very honest man's son, and one for whose memory she has a great regard; and as a proof of it, friend Claypole, I can tell you in confidence, that Henry will be well provided for at

her decease; but he has a high proud spirit of his own, and it must be Fanny's charms, not her money, that will weigh with him."

Claypole was a man that looked to the main chance, and not a word of this was lost upon him: his eyes had not been idle, whilst Fanny's were employed with Henry; he knew her well, and had had a painful trust whilst she had been under his guardianship; he saw her daily in danger of being made the prey of the first sightly knave that laid his traps for her; he had as high an opinion of our young hero as Sir Roger himself had, and was in the same persuasion, as to his being the son of Ratcliffe; believing also that he was in a fair train shortly to become his nephew, he was by no means sorry to hear of Lady Crowbery's intentions in his favour. Upon these grounds he not only became reconciled to the necessity he was under of leaving his niece to her own choice, but was secretly disposed to further the connection by all the means in his power: all these thoughts he kept to himself, and quietly followed his friend Sir Roger to the drawing-room.



CHAPTER V. Fresh Mischief in Meditation against our Hero.
WHEN Sir Roger and his friend entered the apartment of the ladies, they found the young people distributed into pairs; Cary in high talk, and sitting by his cousin; Henry in no talk at all, but fairly pounded in a corner of the room by the manoeuvre of Fanny Claypole, who was so posted as to cut him off from all chance of an escape: she had seated herself in a chair with her back to one side of the room and her knees to the other, so as to form the exact hypotheneuse of a triangle, and Henry in the area of it. There were many fortunate circumstances concurring with the position she had taken to favour her operations; the size of the room was enormous, and the little share of light, that only two candles could have bestowed upon her at that distance, she fairly intercepted by sitting with her back to them, and suffering no one ray to fall upon the person of her prisoner; he also was not the less attuned to her purpose, for being somewhat flustered by

the many toasts he was obliged to pledge by Cary's strict attention to discipline, which he took care to exact with the utmost impartiality towards all under his command, unless he could be said to favour Henry as a volunteer, by thrusting him into the thickest of the fire. To this circumstance only it was owing, that our hero, contrary to his natural good breeding, suffered himself to be so long detached from the rest of the company.
Something or other had discomposed Isabella's spirits, and all Cary's efforts could not rally them. The presence of her father was a relief to her, and, upon his entrance, Henry started from his corner, and joined the circle; Claypole placed himself next to him, and drew him into talk about Blachford and his trepan. Henry, with a good deal of humour, related Ezekiel's account of that gentleman's state of conscience, and his mode of comforting him on the bed of sickness. Claypole observed upon this with some degree of asperity, and hinted, that he should consider Ezekiel as a dangerous enthusiast amongst his parishioners. This led Henry to speak of him in a more serious, stile, and to give such a delineation of his character as turned all hearts in his favour,

especially that soft charitable heart, which Isabella wore in her bosom,—"I should do him injustice," said Henry, "if I were only to bring forward his oddities, and keep his virtues out of sight; I acknowledge that my friend, in some instances, has a super-abundancy of zeal; but it is not that zeal, without knowledge or discernment, which would betray him to intrude where there is no call for his services; he is only a shepherd to the stragglers of the flock; at Crowbery he had full employ, here he will find none."—"I hear," said the divine, "he has been preaching out of trees."—"I don't doubt it," replied Henry, "and to the trees if he thought it would edify a single leaf upon their branches."—"And is it true," resumed the said divine, "that he address'd a funeral sermon at the foot of the gibbet to the effigy of justice Blachford?"—"Perfectly true," quoth Henry, "and I honour him for it, for his heart was right, tho' the mistake was otherwise ridiculous enough."—"I perceive he is a favourite of your's," repeated Claypole.—"And with me a very great one," said Isabella, with some quickness.—Claypole said no more.
When Cary understood, from Henry's discourse,

that he had been living in the same cottage with Ezekiel, it struck him that he must be the very person, who had been represented to him by Captain Crowbery as an idler and a vagrant, proper to be pressed into his ship, and upon a fuller explanation of what had passed on that occasion, there was no doubt that he conjectured rightly. This was a new discovery of another plot, unknown to Henry, though not unnoticed by this history, which that base junto, of which Lord Crowbery was the head, had contrived against him. His countenance upon the developement underwent a change, that shewed the struggle he had within himself to repress the angry emotions of his mind; nevertheless, he commanded himself before the ladies, and simply enquired of Cary if he was acquainted with Captain Crowbery: the answer was, that he had served in the same ship with him some years ago, when he himself was a youngster and Crowbery a lieutenant of marines.—"I shall find an opportunity, perhaps," said Henry, "to convince the gentleman that I want no pressing into a ship, when I can have the honour of fighting under the eye of so gallant a commander." This was at best equivocal, and Isabella turned pale.

—"My quarter-deck is at your service," cried Cary, "and, if occasion calls upon me, I will do my best to preserve the good opinion you conceive of me." This made matters not a whit the better in Isabella's sense of them.—"Don't talk of fighting," cried Fanny Claypole, who had stolen a glance at Isabella, "for if you do, some of us will faint; look, if you have not already turn'd Miss Manstock as pale as a lilly." The remark was true, but cruelly ill-timed; Isabella's countenance suddenly changed to the other extreme, and was scarlet with blushes. Henry bit his lips with rage, but had the prudence to keep silence; Claypole gave his niece a reprimanding frown, but to no purpose.—"I dare say," added she, "Mr. Henry is too wise to put himself into any post of danger, where it is not his duty to be."—"Pardon me," said Cary, with a kind design to turn the attention of the company from Isabella, "that does not appear, for I think I have just now seen my friend in a post of the greatest danger, and I am mistaken if it was duty, and not choice, that brought him there." This sally brought all parties home; Fanny tittered, but seemed rather piqued that Henry had no speech upon the occasion: Isabella in the mean

time recovered so far as to glance a momentary look of approbation at our silent hero, which said to him—but where is the commentator that will help me to a construction of what it said, in words that will not debase the sense of the original? It is enough that Henry understood it.
Hearts easily impressed with sudden passions are generally communicative; Fanny Claypole's was of this sort; prone to love at first sight, and not in the practice of suppressing her emotions, she had given Henry pretty clearly to understand that he was not indifferent to her. This she contrived to convey to him, during their conference in the corner, through the channel of more senses than one, and though they were not all just then in the clearest state of apprehension, none were so disabled as to lose their functions. The fondness of a fine woman never can, nor ever ought to be treated with indifference and contempt; neither was it in the present instance. This gallantry, so indispensible on the part of Henry, confirmed her in the full persuasion, that the impression was reciprocal, so that when her uncle afterwards took occasion, as they were passing to the supper room, civilly to submit to her in a whisper,

if she was not a little too particular with a new acquaintance, she answered him in the true spirit of independence, that he need not concern himself about appearances, she and her new acquaintance, as he called him, perfectly understood each other. This, though something more than she was warranted to say, was no more than she thought prudent to assert, by way of check to any objections, which she was prepared to expect from that cautious quarter. For Isabella she had another language; from her she expected no opposition, and dreaded no rivalship; but there was an innate delicacy of character in that amiable young lady, which made it necessary for Fanny to conform to it, in appearances at least, and she was sensible that the levity of her behaviour stood in need of some softening and apology, for she had not been so totally engrossed by her own pursuits, as not to perceive that Isabella did not entirely approve her proceedings in the corner. She followed her therefore into her dressing room, when they retired for the night, and as soon as Susan was sent away, the ensuing conversation took place:—"I can see by your looks," said Fanny, "that I am out of favour with you; you think

I have behav'd like a fool, and expos'd myself, I know you do; but, dear sweet soul, don't turn that grave countenance upon me, but hear, and pity me, and be my friend. I confess to you, I never was so taken by surprise in all my life. I know what young men in general are, and how cautious we ought to be in our behaviour towards them; but you never told me that I was to behold what I did not believe was in nature, and so my poor heart, being caught in an unguarded moment, and not being made of either flint or steel, cou'd not stand the shock, but, alas for me! was overthrown in the end; not at first, do you mark me; for, handsome as he is, if he had been only that, I could have look'd upon him as one does upon a picture, and thought no more about him; but the misfortune is, he is so irresistibly engaging withal, that it requires either more insensibility, or more hypocrisy than I am mistress of, to prevent his finding out how agreeable he is to me: now I dare say you see him with other eyes than I do, and think all this very filly, and perhaps it is not very wise; but upon my life, my dear, I find it very natural."


"Whether I see Henry exactly with the same eyes that you do," replied Isabella, "is

more than I can answer for; but if it is on the goodness of his character that you found your regard for him, we certainly do not differ in opinion as to that."—"Oh, you chilling creature!" exclaimed Fanny, with an affected kind of shriek; "that is so like you, so guarded, and so precise: the goodness of his character indeed! why 'tis an expression for an attorney; and then, my regard for him truly! there's a freezing word! regard for such a man as Henry! I much doubt if I have any such sensation belonging to me; 'tis a mere icicle compar'd to what I feel. Pray, my dear Isabella, let me ask you one plain question, and honestly resolve me, if you do not think him positively and without compare the finest young fellow in creation?"

The lovely Isabella paused upon this question; she drew up, and with a somewhat stronger tint of the rose in her cheeks than was natural to her, said—"I never think or speak in such a rapturous strain of any man, neither do I call them familiarly fellows; it may be the fashionable name for them, but I have not yet brought my lips to the style of it."—"In your own style then," replied Fanny, "and without any trespass on the purity of your immaculate

expressions, tell me, if you please whether you consider a tender sentiment for a young man like Henry as a violation of the laws of modesty, as a sin against the delicacy of the sex; but understand me rightly, I do not put the case as applying to you but to myself."—"That's a little hard, methinks," said Isabella, "to put a question of conscience to me, that does not respect myself. If I was apt to talk of other people's conduct you might have a just excuse for tying me down to my words, but as I promise you I shall in no time to come pass a censure on your actions, I think, dear Fanny, I may be excus'd from pronouncing upon them before hand."


"Well," answer'd she, "you are always too wise for me; and yet I am persuaded, if you saw me in any danger, you have too much good nature not to guard me against it. If man was such a monster as some old maids make him to be, you, who are far enough out of his reach, wou'd not suffer me to be devour'd by him. If Love be not harmless, why do they describe him as a child?"—"When I have been taught Love's catechism," quoth Isabella, "I may be able to answer your question; at present I know nothing about it;

but I shou'd guess, if you was to apply to Henry, he wou'd be much more likely to satisfy your enquiries than I am."—"I believe you, on my conscience," said Fanny, looking archly as she spoke; "Henry is likely enough to tell me how harmless love is; but question may lead to question, and in the end he may be found to preach one thing and practise another."

To this the fair moralist gravely answered—"Never, Fanny, will Henry, or any other man of honour, lose his respect whilst you preserve your dignity. How he might treat questions of so frivolous a sort, and flippancies so profest, as I never prov'd him with any thing of the kind, so I cannot answer for him in the case; certain it is, that if a woman is not secure in herself, no man shou'd be trusted by her; for my own part, I have walk'd and convers'd with Henry at all hours, and in all places, without fear or reserve."—"Oh Heavens!" exclaimed Fanny, "and you survive it! well, but in the first place you are not in love with him, that is out of all doubt; nature seems to have exempted you from that weakness; and the insurmountable barrier which your rank and fortune oppose to ambition

on his part, was he dispos'd to entertain it, throws him at such a distance, that he can only regard you with an awful respect. You are the heiress of Sir Roger Manstock; Henry is, the Lord knows who; you have a beloved father, for whose sake it is well known you have rejected, and wou'd again reject, suitors of the best pretensions; this young man, obscure, unknown even to himself, and without pretensions, must of consequence be without hope, and where there is no hope, my dear Isabella, you know there can be no spirit for enterprize, nay, I shou'd think impossibilities can scarce provoke desire; so that at all events you are out of danger, and being immoveable in your own resolutions, have nothing to fear either from Henry or yourself."

Whilst Fanny reasoned in this manner, it was as much as Isabella's politeness could do to attend with patience the conclusion of her argument, upon the very first pause she interposed by replying,—"When you labour to convince me that I am in no danger with a person of Henry's sort, you do but argue to assure me, that when the sun gives his light I am not in the dark; but when you wou'd assign other causes of my security, than what

are to be found simply in his honour, your argument becomes more ingenious than solid, because there needs not more than one good and sufficient reason for any one thing. As for that awful respect, which you ascribe to him, as applicable to my rank and fortune compar'd with his own, believe me, Fanny, I am not likely to exact, nor he to pay it, on that account; if he gives as much as my behaviour merits, be assur'd he adds nothing on the score of those worldly advantages fortune has for the present thrown into my scale, and which she may have in reserve for his in an equal or superior degree; I desire, therefore, to be understood as owing no security to those insurmountable barriers, which you fancy you discover between us, but which are as imaginary as the exemption that you flatter me with supposing I enjoy by nature from the common weaknesses of my sex, or the resolution you credit me for having fix'd so immoveably against all suitors, because I have declin'd the tenders of some. If there is an imputation that wou'd wound me deeper even than the charge of levity and coquetry, it is that of being thought a proud despiser of those beneath

my level, and insensible of soul to merit in an humble state of fortune. When I have said this in justification of myself, we will leave the subject where it is, observing only, that if you, being your own mistress in all respects, are serious in this attachment, and can engage the heart of a man so truly amiable and so strictly honourable, you will be the happiest of women; and if some few may condemn you for your disinterestedness, there will be many more to envy you for your good fortune."—"Well then, my dear Isabella," said Fanny, in conclusion, "if I was resolutely to marry this young unknown, you wou'd not think me quite run mad?"—"Upon my word," replied she, "I will not flatter you so far as to say I shou'd."—"Then I will go and consult my pillow on the matter," said Fanny, "and so good night to you!"




CHAPTER VI. Love is a subtle Arguer.
WE who are historians of fiction have a privilege that historians of fact do not enjoy, which, like the ring of Gyges, gives us the power of invisibility, by which we insinuate ourselves most completely into the secrets of our heroes and heroines, and instead of arguing, as our unendowed brethren do, from records and authorities, up to the thoughts and characters of our actors, which at best is but an uncertain kind of guess-work, we can go point-blank to their hearts, in spite of all the obliquities of words and actions, and give to our readers the idea in embryo before it has been brought to the birth, or ever mounted to the lips. In virtue of this privilege I shall let Fanny Claypole go, as her meditations may easily be guessed at, and remain with the lovely Isabella, whose thoughts are probably more deep, and undoubtedly more interesting.
As soon as she was alone, she began to take a strict review of what had been her state of

mind and temper during the foregoing scene: the first reflection that occurred to her was of the self-accusing sort; she had acted with duplicity.—"Have I not permitted Fanny to conclude that Henry is indifferent to me? and is he?"—To this her heart replied that he was not. Her next reproach was for the coldness and reserve with which she had met the warmth of Fanny's friendly confidence:—"I hate myself for that," she said; "it looks so like what I detest and disavow, pride and disdain."—Here she paused, and began to call over, as near as memory enabled her, the very words she had used in her past discourse with her friend. Her faults did not appear so glaring upon this review; her silence with, respect to Henry did not strike her as so direct a breach of that frank sincerity which was her nature; she did not see the obligation she was under to make discovery of impressions, the reality of which she was not yet assured of: why should Fanny's levity, who said every thing at random that was uppermost in her thoughts, draw her into the like idle vein of talking?—"If she will pronounce upon my insensibility, it is not I that lead her into the mistake, nor am I sure it was my business to lead her out

of it."—She now commenced a stricter examination of her heart, inspected it with a severer eye, and found, or thought she found, some cause to suspect it of jealousy, a baneful passion.—"Oh horrible!" she cried, "what's this that I discover? this pang I never felt before! this disposition to repine and murmur at another's happiness! Hateful propensity! I'll banish it at once; it makes me mean and loathsome to myself. Why cou'd not I be well content when she was pleased? why sigh and vex myself, and love her less than ever I did before, because she sat with Henry, and engross'd him to herself? I'll call her back, and tell her I admire her generous, her disinterested passion; nay, I'll do more, I'll go and be her advocate with him she loves; that will be noble, that will be a gallant conquest over myself; and she deserves him, she will marry him; she has the happy privilege of chusing for herself; I am—Alas! I know not what I am; but this I know, I am not quite so desperate and romantic as to sacrifice myself, and be officious in her cause, and so, perhaps, give Henry just offence, and yet do her no service: no, that won't do; I am not bound to go so far as that, nay, I am sensible I cannot: alas!

alas! I but deceive myself; the more I look into myself the more dissatisfied I am with what I see: I find my heart incapable of generosity; it is not what it was. I will not injure Fanny, or betray her, but I perceive I cannot be her friend."

Ah Isabella! dear ingenuous girl, you see the point which honour fain would reach, but do not see the interposing passion that diverts it from his course. This night you must wear out in sleepless meditations; within the region of your heart there's one at work, whose innovating spirit never rests till it has perplexed the reason, overturned the peace, tampered with the loyalty, and shook the bosom's lord upon his throne. Love is that subtle dark incendiary, which unexperienced candour has no guard against: he wears a soft alluring smile, flatters in gentle whispers, wooes you to pleasure, vexes you with no complaint, is social, gay, familiar, void of care; charmed by his artful approaches you admit him of your parties, make him your inmate, and lodge him in your bosom; then the turmoil begins, then all his specious qualities are seen no more; unsocial, murmuring, discontented, he begins to brood upon his schemes, shunning the face of man

and day, renouncing food and sleep, hiding himself in dark and solitary places, till all is anarchy, misrule and madness, to the destruction both of heart and brain.
Ah Isabella! dear ingenuous girl, there was a time when you would have entertained this openness of heart, this frank confession of your friend with heart as open, confidence as frank; you would have given her warm disinterested passion then a noble name, encouraged it with your applause, promoted it with all your power; but jealousy, that fierce and active partisan of love, will not permit these energies of native generosity to have their play; it is a monopolizing miser that will let no partner have an interest in that stake at which it singly grasps, and often, in the zeal of competition, overrates the prize which it would fain engross.—This probably was not its error in the case of Henry; but though the rivalship of Fanny could not easily give more than its true value to the object in dispute, yet, doubtless, it excited sensations in Isabella's bosom, which, had they not been stirred so roughly, might have enjoyed a longer calm; the passion, which she saw reflected from the fond eyes of Fanny, quickened her curiosity to scrutinize the engaging

form on which those eyes were fixed; she followed them to the attracting point, and there she found enough to warrant all that rapture and delight with which they seemed inspired; she saw the art with which Fanny had posted herself, heard the murmur of her voice in soft and tender tones, and marked the animation of her action, her starts, and titterings, and coquetries, to all which she gave meaning and matter as her fancy dictated. This was the state of her mind, whilst Cary's railleries, once so entertaining, distracted her attention, and Fanny was enjoying her triumph, till her father's presence drew Henry from his corner, and dissolved the spell.
If the gentle Isabella, with a heart thus agitated, fell short in any degree of her wonted candour towards Fanny, either during her conversation with her, or in the course of her reflections that ensued upon it, let any who have experienced similar situations arraign her if they can.

"Dear Madam," cried Susan as she entered the room, "how pale you look! I hope nothing has happened to vex you."—"What shou'd vex me?" said Isabella, sighing as she asked the question.—"Nay, Madam," replied

the girl, "I can't pretend to say what shou'd vex you, unless it be that teazing miss who has held you so long from your repose, and who, they say, is so forward amongst the men, that I'm sure you can't approve of her goings on with Mr. Henry."—Who tells you this?" said the mistress; "who are they that say she is forward with Mr. Henry?"—"Nay, Madam," replied the girl, "I dont't know who says it in particular; every body says it that saw it; if I were to name names I shou'd pass for an informer, and I'm sure I shou'd be sorry to make mischief in the family, and stir up a combustion amongst my fellow-servants; if it offends you, Madam, I will have done."


"It does not offend me, Susan," said Isabella, looking graciously upon her, "nor need you have done on that account, as supposing what you say to me can possibly be repeated in this family. No doubt the servants, who waited at table, must have observed Miss Claypole's particularity; she was very unguarded to be sure."—"And very ridiculous, Madam, if I may say so," cried Susan, "for every body seems to think she can do herself no good by it, and that her schemes won't take with the young gentleman, who certainly did

not relish her behaviour, though he was too much of a man to turn his back upon her publicly; yet they tell me he look'd very cross at times, and that I'm sure is not natural to him: I dare say, Madam, you never saw him look cross in your days; for my part I can safely swear I never saw a frown upon his brow, though he has had enough to vex him, poor dear soul; therefore I'll forfeit my life if this lady has not done for herself; and if ever I come cleverly to the speech of him, I warrant me I'll get it all out, unless you are pleas'd to order otherwise, and see fit to forbid me."—"Why shou'd I do that?" Isabella replied, "since you will speak only for yourself, and not let him suppose that I can have any interest in the state of his heart towards Miss Claypole; in that, you know, I cannot possibly have the smallest concern, further than as mere matter of curiosity to hear how she stands with him; that is natural enough, you see, because, somehow or other, Susan, I have taken it strongly into my head, that Henry is not over-fond of forward girls."—Susan blushed from consciousness that the remark was just, to which she ingenuously gave testimony, saying, that she believed the world

did not contain his like for honour towards the sex, and true modesty of nature.—"I have reason to say it," added she; "for love wou'd have made a fool of me, and something worse perhaps, but for his care and generous concern for me. Oh! Madam, did you but know him as I do; had you seen him in poverty and in sorrow; how patient, how resign'd, of injuries how forgiving, in dangers how brave, in nature how benevolent; oh! Madam, you wou'd not wonder if a girl like me had lov'd him to distraction."


"Indeed, my good girl," said the amiable Isabella, blushing as she spoke, "there is all the reason in the world for loving him, and I do not wonder at you; every body that knows him must love him."—"That's what I say," resumed she; "but lackaday! as for this young madam that is so hot upon it, what is her love? mere outside love; the love of the eye; that will never make its way with him; I am certain that my Mr. Henry will never be her man, no, not if she had a thousand pounds where she has one."—"Indeed, Susan," replied Isabella, "I agree with you that fortune will never be Henry's motive for making love; and though Miss Claypole is a handsome girl,

I shou'd doubt if her manners are to his taste; nay, I own to you, it wou'd very much sink him in my opinion, was he to place his regards there; and I think I may venture to answer for him, that he will not."—"Answer for him!" cried Susan, "I will swear it, Madam: no, no; his heart is otherwise bestow'd, his affections are more worthily plac'd; and if ever he swerves from the lovely object he adores, to trifle and disgrace himself with that vain wanton flirting Miss Claypole, if ever he does that, I will, I will."—"Come, come, Susan," said Isabella, interposing, "there is no fear of him; I shou'd be forced to hate him if he did, and that wou'd make me wretched; but no more of this at present: get you to bed; we shall have a stormy night, and upon those occasions I always sit up till it is over."



CHAPTER VII. The Hero of our History is brought to Shame.
THERE was a gallery in this quarter of the house, which had a communication with several of the apartments, and amongst

others with that which Fanny Claypole occupied. Here she was met by Henry, as she was going to her chamber some time after her conference with Isabella. We confess it does not set off the gallantry of our hero, that he would fain have contented himself with civilly bidding her good night, and so have passed onwards to his bed-room, which also opened into the aforesaid gallery. There were other modes of disposing of time, to Fanny's mind in its present state, more grateful than that of devoting it to solitude and sleep. She contrived to hold him in parley some few minutes, and in that short space of time the storm foreseen by Isabella took place; the winds began to howl, the lightnings flashed, and the thunder rolled.
Fanny's gentle spirits instantly took alarm; her terrors deprived her of the power of stirring from the spot on which she stood; she clung close to Henry, clasping him with both arms, and seeming to supplicate protection in the most piteous manner. It was in vain he encouraged her to lay aside her fears, that the burst was over, and the storm had spent its fury; she was sure there would be more of it; she did not dare to move; and she implored

him not to leave her; thunder had always such an effect upon her, that it would throw her into fits if she had not somebody to support her, and as for her own servant, (whom he offered to call to her assistance) she was to the full as mere a coward as herself, and totally helpless. What could he do, but cheer the frighted fair one, who resorted to his courage for protection in this extremity? Another burst succeeded, the thunder louder and the flash more vivid. Fanny's arms now strained him closer than before; she dropt her head upon his neck, and hid her face; she shook in every limb, and murmuring cried—Support me, or I shall drop!—When the senses are possessed by fear, all reserve ceases, nay, even delicacy itself; we cling to the most loathsome object that gives us shelter from the face of danger. If Fanny's terrors were proportionable to the eagerness with which she embraced her supporter, they were strong indeed. Henry was not sorry to see a couch conveniently within reach, on which he could deposit his fair burthen, which now indeed was become a very pressing and importunate concern; her knees seemed sinking under her, and as she hung upon his neck with

her whole weight, he began to think the fit she had predicted was actually upon her; he took her in his arms, and placed her carefully, and with all due delicacy, on the couch; as she still kept her hold upon him, of necessity he was drawn down upon the seat beside her.
The storm went on, the pitiless elements relaxed not of their fury, and poor affrighted Fanny, trembling more than ever, faintly whispered, sighing the whilst most movingly—"Dearest of men, what will become of me? shelter me, I beseech you, from this scene of terror."—As the flitting wheatear huddles herself under the turf whilst the gathering clouds hang threatening over her head, and cast a gloom upon the earth, so did the like timorous damsel, under the protection of her courageous defender, gazing on him with uplifted eyes that prayed for pity on her disconsolate condition, and encircling him in her arms, whilst she softly murmured—"Oh Henry! let the lightning strike me now; within your arms I die content."


"Oh Henry!" honour also cried, "awake and be yourself! whither are you rushing? break from her hold; escape from her snares; they are spread for your destruction; the moment

is on the wing that wafts you to perpetual disgrace. Rash, heated youth! accursed power of wine, that thus inflames the blood and blinds the eye of reason: can you not see these terrors are but counterfeit, panders to passion? the storm that you should dread is in your veins, not in the elements; awake, and save yourself!"

What shall we say? Must we break Nature's mould, and fashion an imaginary hero of purer matter than of earthly clay, setting up a phantom of perfection, without speck or blemish, for enthusiastic ignorance to wonder at? Is it to shew man as he is, or only as he ought to be, that we compose this history? Surely as he is; we make not men by working in our closets, but take them ready made from the world's mighty warehouse, and present them as we found them; therefore, as the hand of nature guides my pen, so do I write, and here consign my hero to as much disgrace as impurity in meditation, not in act, may in the judgment of my candid readers seem to merit: virtue had lost its hold upon his heart, honour's appeal was silenced, and modesty had turned away her face from the suspicicus scene, when in the very moment as he hovered

on the brink of ruin, a sudden scream from Isabella's chamber snatched him from his fate; her door flew open, and behold the very form of loveliness in fear's most striking attitude! Swift as the lightning's glance our hero started from the couch, shook off the embrace that bound him like a spell, and, deaf to Fanny's scream, flew to the rescue of the trembling Isabella.
Fear had not so far robbed her of her senses, but that she had sufficient faculties to note the situation of the parties, whom her presence had so critically broken in upon. Instant aversion seized her heart, and superseded the less urgent sense even of fear itself: she was at once indignant and composed; so that when Henry, in a faultering voice, begged to know what alarmed her, she turned disdainfully away, and in a tone that pierced him to the heart, bade him pay his attentions where they were more wanted and more welcome, then hastily returned into her chamber, and locked the door.
A long and dismal silence ensued between the parties in the gallery. Fanny remained seated on the couch, her dress disordered, her looks wild, and her attitude that of a Sybil in

her phrensy. Henry stood motionless, confounded, the very statue of despair and horror.—"I am undone!" cried Fanny, "Isabella has discovered us; she has the eyes of a lynx, and nothing now remains to save me from disgrace and ruin, but boldly to join hands this moment, and defy the world."—"Miss Claypole," said Henry, "I hold myself in honour bound to make you every reparation that you can require; I only wish you to consider, if the mode you point at is not desperate in the extreme: I am but what I am, and that is, nothing; in this house I will not pass another day; worlds would not tempt me to encounter the chaste eyes of that offended lady; before you make so rash a sacrifice, therefore, recollect it is only to appearances you would make it, and that your conscience does not plead to facts, thank Heaven!"—"Thank Heaven for what?" she eagerly demanded; "not for the interruption that her jealousy occasion'd; not for the shock that she has given to my tortur'd nerves: it is not that I blush at what has pass'd, or any thing that might have pass'd, but only that she knows it. No, Henry, when I took you in my arms, I bound my heart to you by vows as sacred as if pledg'd before the altar;

favours bestow'd on you I never can regret; they are sanctify'd by honour; they are endearments snatch'd by opportunity from the cold lingering forms of law; the overflowings of a heart that doats upon you, whose pride it is to give you proofs of boundless confidence:—Here is my hand; take it, Henry, and with it take a husband's right in all that this fond heart and devoted person can bestow; we do but borrow a few hours from time."


"Not so," cried Henry, stepping back; not in this tumult of your mind will I avail myself of an extorted sacrifice, and take your hand. I do most resolutely bar the agreement till the event is seen. Mark what Miss Manstock does; our fate is in her hands alone; if by her means (which I am slow to suspect) the story gets abroad, and that your fame requires it, I shall be at hand; and here I solemnly engage my honour to come forth upon your summons, whether it be to confute falshood and exaggeration at the risk of my person, or to repair your injuries by marriage, if this you shall require; and from this promise no temptation, be it what it may, shall make me swerve."

With these words he departed, leaving her to bewail her disappointment, and murmur out

reproaches for his coldness, amidst tears, and sighs, and sleepless tossings in a solitary bed. As for his mind, it felt a stab in every thought; one fatal lapse had sunk him in his own esteem; and in the promise he had made to Fanny, every hope that could aspire to Isabella was for ever buried. Not daring to enquire the cause of her alarm, he conjectured that it must have been created by the storm, and saw, with some degree of consolation, that it now was past. Captain Cary was to return to his ship by the very first of the morning, and had kept his chaise and post-horses waiting for that purpose; and as immediate retreat from Manstock House was Henry's fixt resolve, the opportunity was fair for taking him and his baggage off at once, before the family was stirring. Their road fortunately laid through Crowbery, which was something more than half way; it was possible, therefore, that Cary's time might allow of a short call at Ezekiel's or Zachary's house, where some information might be gained of Lady Crowbery's destination, and if that should turn out to be for Lisbon, all was so far well, if his new friend would stand to his offer of transporting him thither. It was necessary, however, to take a proper

leave of Sir Roger; and for this purpose he immediately wrote the following letter, addressed to that worthy personage:



Sir,

Impressed with a sense of your favours, which no time can obliterate, I beg leave to inform you, that I have embraced Captain Cary's kind offer of a cruize, and hope you will consider it with your usual candour, both as an excuse for the abruptness of my departure, and a pardonable ambition to attach myself, though at humble distance, to the fortunes of so brave a commander.

I have the honour to be, Sir, your most obliged, and ever devoted Servant, HENRY.





CHAPTER VIII. A Visitor appears at Manstock House, who brings Intelligence of an unexpected Sort.
THOUGH Cary's chaise was ordered to the door by break of day, yet such of the domestics as had notice of it were ready waiting

to make tender of their services and farewels at his departure; to one of these Henry delivered his letter for Sir Roger, and from the same person he had the satisfaction to hear that Isabella's alarm, which proceeded from the sudden burst of one of her window shutters, shivered by a stroke of lightning, had passed off without any f
•
rther ill consequences; but what was his surprise when he found himself accosted by his friend Susan May at this early hour, who drew him aside, and in a whisper eagerly demanded—"What in the name of madness can possess you to be running away from your good fortune at the very moment when my lovely mistress is dropping into your arms? Oh! if you had but heard what she said of you last night!"—"Tell it not to me," he exclaimed, "I have undone myself with her for ever!"—Then recollecting that he was on the point of betraying Fanny Claypole, he checked himself, and grasping both her hands in his—"Susan!" he cried, "I conjure you, by the love you once had for me, never name me to your angelic mistress; I am going to shake off this loathsome existence, and my last breath will expire in prayers for her."—This

said, he turned away, and sprung into the chaise, where his companion was waiting for him.
And now, as we can well believe the better part of our readers are by this time become indifferent to the fate of our unworthy hero, we will leave him, without regret, to pursue his journey, and for the present confine our attention to the house of Manstock.
As soon as Fanny Claypole was drest, she presented herself at the door of Isabella's chamber, and was instantly admitted. Without any embarrassment, she began her enquiries as to the alarm she had suffered in the storm; and when that was explained, and the shattered window shutter referred to, Fanny, in her turn, undertook a plausible account of her being thrown into a fit by the violence of her fright, and of Henry's great attention in conveying her to the couch, and protecting her in her distress, with so much tenderness, that she verily believed she owed her life to his care.—"I am sure," added she, "I shall never forget his kind assiduity so long as I live; and though I dare say my situation, stretch'd at my length, and helpless as I was, might appear to you a little equivocal, yet I can truly assert that the dear man was as delicate in his treatment of me as

if he had been one of our own sex."—"I promise you," replied Isabella, "I shou'd very unwillingly suppose to the contrary; only I cou'd wish, if you have any more fits, it may literally be one of our own sex, and not Mr. Henry, that will fetch you out of them."—"Humph!" said Fanny, "I assure you I shall not be asham'd to thank him before all the company, when I see him in the breakfast-room."—Upon this they separated.
Susan had been so observant of Henry's injunctions, that she had not named him to her mistress, and that young lady being equally silent, his departure was as much a secret to her as to Fanny. Isabella had passed a wretched night; her dread of meeting Henry was extreme; she gave little ear to Fanny's palliating account; and, with a mind agonized between love and resentment, she came trembling down the stairs; at the foot of them Susan was standing, her eyes drenched with tears, and a paper in her hand, that had just been delivered to her by the servant who generally attended upon Henry: Isabella demanded a sight of it, and before the girl had time to recollect herself, it was in her hands, and she read these words:



Give this inclosed trifle to your worthy mother, being a small return of gratitude from that wretched creature, whom her charity once harboured. You can need nothing, being under the protection of an angel. Farewel for ever!

HENRY.



The contents were a bank bill for twenty pounds.—"Is he then gone!" cried Isabella, "gone for ever! Oh my God!"—Then with a sigh fell lifeless into Susan's arms.
At that moment Sir Roger came out of his dressing room, and ran with agony to demand what ailed his darling. Susan, with admirable presence of mind, slipt the letter out of sight, and answered, that her lady had been extremely frighted by the storm, had passed a sleepless night, and had fainted through mere weakness and fatigue;—"But all will soon be well," said she; "you see she is recovering," (which was true) and then she recounted the accident of the shutter in Isabella's hearing, to convince her that no discovery had been made of any other cause. Sir Roger led his daughter into his own apartment, and sent Susan for hartshorn and water. Isabella repeated

the account of her fright exactly as Susan had given it, and soon declared herself sufficiently recovered to attend upon the company at breakfast.—"You will find our party," said Sir Roger, "has suffered a loss that I dare say you will regret as much as I do: my nephew Jack has stolen away our young Henry from us; here is his letter."—This he delivered to Isabella, and she read what we have before recited. She returned it to him with a mournful look, and was silent; in truth she was not at that moment enough composed to venture an attempt at words.

"My dear child," cried Sir Roger, observing her turn paler than before, "I hope you are not ill again."—Isabella answered, that she was not quite recovered, but begged him not to be alarmed, for it would soon pass off.—"I suspect," said the good man, holding the letter in his hand, "this will be bad news for Fanny Claypole, for she seems to be very fond of the young man, and if we bring it out upon her unawares it may create some confusion, and distress her. I think it will be better for me to whisper it to her uncle, and let him break it to her after we are out of the way; we may easily devise some excuse

for his not being at breakfast. But does not this look like a pretence of Henry's for getting away from her? I suspect that Fanny has not play'd her cards well, and comes on rather faster than he approves of: I protest it seems to me to be all up with her, by the purport of this letter."—"I shou'd think a woman risques a great deal by such forward advances," replied Isabella; "but I suppose she knows her man, and probably they understand each other."—"Why so she told her uncle last night," said Sir Roger, "now you bring it to my recollection, and he believes that every thing goes on to her heart's content."—"I don't doubt it," cried Isabella.—"And I can assure you," added Sir Roger, "Claypole himself is very well inclin'd to the match."—"Then I dare say the match will take place," said Isabella, somewhat pettishly; "for Mr. Claypole is very apt to succeed in his undertakings; but let us not meddle with it, for I think it is no concern of ours."—This being concluded, they went into the breakfast room.
As the company were sitting down to the table, and before any notice had been taken of the absence of Henry, the porter's bell announced

an arrival, and Mr. L— was ushered into the room; he took his seat by Sir Roger, and all eyes were eagerly directed towards him, expecting, yet dreading, the result of his intelligence. He soon relieved their anxiety, by saying he had left Lady Crowbery preparing to undertake the journey he had advised; she was to set out the next day, and proceed by easy stages to London.—"I have no doubt," he said, "that an English winter must by all means be avoided, and that Lisbon will be her ultimate destination; but as I shou'd be loth to take the sole responsibility of so valuable a life on myself, we are to have a consultation of physicians when she arrives in town, and my advice will then either have the sanction of the faculty, or better opinions will direct her otherwise."—Sir Roger made a civil remark upon this, and Mr. L— proceeded to say, that he flattered himself she had gained strength within the last few days, and that her spirits were greatly relieved from that dejected state in which he found them; he had prevailed upon my Lord to reinstate the gentleman she had been so long used to in his attendance upon her; he had fully communicated with Mr. Cawdle

on her case, and discussed with him the whole process he was to follow, both as to medicine and regimen, till they met in London; and concluded by informing Sir Roger, to his utter surprise, that his niece would repose herself at his house the very next day, and make that the first stage of her journey.
Sir Roger started, struck his hands together with more than usual energy, and fixing his eyes upon his visitor, seemed to be surveying him with that sort of curiosity and surprise as a conjurer excites in his spectators, when he has almost persuaded them that he has the devil in his circle. How did he bring Lord Crowbery to consent to this, was the question from more than one quarter?—"I perceive," said this excellent person in reply, "I need not disguise from this company, that I had some prejudices to overcome; but few dispositions are so naturally obstinate as to hold out against truth and reason: Lady Crowbery's very serious indisposition made it my duty to scrutinize into causes, and I saw so much of mental distress combin'd with bodily, that I perceiv'd she wou'd be irretrievably lost, unless some instant relaxation was provided for her; in this part of my investigation I had

great assistance from Mr. Cawdle; I found him possess'd of every thing that cou'd throw light upon the case, much attach'd to the person of the Lady, and sufficiently intelligent in his line for all the purposes I had in meditation for her relief. I found it necessary to be very explicit in my statement with my Lord; I told him that I had discovered, in my patient's case, wounds deep and out of sight, which were beyond my art to cure without his assistance, I must therefore condition for full confidence and concurrence, or immediate dismission: this brought matters to an issue, and I must do his Lordship the justice to say, he was not long in deciding upon the alternative.—These," said he, addressing himself to the worthy Baronet, "are all the means that I have us'd for inducing Lord Crowbery to consent to his Lady making your house her first place of rest, and to permit her to be attended through the whole journey by Mr. Cawdle, who, with great zeal and alacrity, very much to his honour, embrac'd the undertaking at the very first word."—"God bless him for it!" cried Sir Roger, "I'll engage he will be no loser by it. Permit me to say, Sir, you have effected wonders."


Several enquiries were now made as to Lady Crowbery's mode of travelling, what servants were to attend upon her, and whether my Lord would accompany her to Manstock or elsewhere. Full information was obtained upon all these points, and Lord Crowbery did not propose to go any part of the way with her; he was waiting the event of Mr. Blachford's death, which was almost hourly to be looked for.—"What had he to do with that?" was the question from Mr. Claypole; "Did his Lordship expect to be benefited by that gentleman's decease?"—"If he does," replied Mr. L—, "I have reason to believe his expectations will be defeated altogether: I met the heir of Mr. Blachford this morning, within a mile of his house."—All ears were instantly, as it were, erect for the news; he proceeded,—"As Mr. Blachford does not wish to keep the disposition of his property a secret, I have no scruple to say, that I was myself a witness to his will, and commission'd by him to seek for the young gentleman in this house, who is to inherit under it; but, as I said before, I luckily fell in with him, in company with a sea-officer, who, I understand, is your nephew, Sir, and in a situation by which I not only

fortunately came to the knowledge of him, but had an opportunity of being in some further degree of use to him."

Here the agitation of more persons than one became so conspicuous, that Mr. L— found it necessary to be very quick in assuring his audience, that no manner of mischief had ensued. A fracas, indeed, had taken place between the heir aforesaid and Captain Crowbery, who, in consequence, had turned out by the road side, with the pistols which the sea-officer had in his chaise, to settle their difference; one had been fired without effect by the young gentleman, whom he only knew by the name of Henry, and Captain Crowbery had discharged the other in the air, upon which the quarrel was made up, and the parties, before he left them, perfectly reconciled to each other.

"Heaven be prais'd!"—cried Isabella, her face as pale as ashes. "How horrible it is," said Mr. Claypole, "that such a practice as duelling shou'd exist in a Christian country!"—"Horrible do you call it?" said Fanny, "I honour Henry for his spirit; I adore him for it; wou'd you have a gentleman put up with such an insult as he receiv'd from that

nasty Captain? for my part I am only sorry he let him off so easily."

If a tea cup had not, at this instant, dropt from the fair hand of Isabella, by some chance or other, and drawn the attention of the company to the accident, it is to be presumed the Reverend Mr. Claypole wou'd not have suffered doctrine so adverse to his own to have been advanced by his niece without an answer; but as every body seemed interested about Isabella, he let the matter pass off, and contented himself with conveying his dissent, by the vehicle of a reproving look.
The conversation was now resumed, and many enquiries made as to Blachford's extraordinary bequest: was he sufficiently in his senses to dictate a will? and had they taken such precautions as would prevent a future litigation?—To this it was answered by Mr. L—, that himself, Zachary Cawdle, and Alexander Kinloch, were witnesses not to the will only, but to the capacity and sound senses of the will-maker.—"Was it not, however," Mr. Claypole demanded, "the most singular and unexpected event that ever came to pass? and what cou'd have mov'd Blachford's heart so on a sudden to bestow his whole

fortune upon one, whose life he had attempted to take away?"—To this question Mr. L— calmly replied, that he presumed there could be little difficulty in accounting for what had been done by Mr. Blachford in the young person's favour, if it was admitted that the heart of a dying man was capable of being touched by repentance, and a desire of atoning for the crimes he had committed; and that it was so, he believed the will itself would clearly evince, as it spoke very plainly to the motives of the testator. "There was," added he, "a good creature, by name Ezekiel Daw, very much about him (too much perhaps for his body's health) who certainly cooperated with the terrors of death in bringing this about, which appears to you so extraordinary an act: the man, it must be own'd, is something of an enthusiast, and for some time I kept him from my patient; but when it became a lost case, and the penitent on his death-bed eagerly demanded his return, I no longer opposed it; he was, undoubtedly, the great instrument of moving him to repentance, and to him I consider this young gentleman much indebted for the very ample atonement he will receive at Mr. Blachford's

decease: I understand there is something mysterious in his history, but, from the reception he has met in this family, I can't doubt but he well deserves the good fortune that has befallen him."

Here Sir Roger Manstock broke silence, and in terms strong, though concise, gave his hearty testimony to the merits and good qualities of our hero. When the worthy Baronet had ceased speaking, Mr. L— expressed himself well pleased that his pre-possessions in this instance had not misled him.—"For I profess to you," said he, addressing himself to Sir Roger, "I did never in my life feel a a stronger impression from the person and countenance of any man than in the instance of this youth, and his conduct in the affair with Captain Crowbery was exactly such as was best calculated to confirm it."

Sir Roger, with a smile of approbation, gave sign of his assent; Fanny Claypole said, she believed there could be but one opinion in the case; and the Reverend Mr. Claypole, straying a little from the subject in hand, observed, that Henry would now find himself a very rich and happy man, glancing a look at

the same time towards his niece.—"That is as it may be," said Sir Roger, "as to his riches; Mr. Blachford, perhaps, has poor relations left behind him, and my friend Henry has a worthy spirit of his own."—Claypole's countenance fell, but Mr. L— relieved him from his embarrassment, by saying, he could speak upon that subject from the authority of Blachford himself, who had told him that he had not a single relation in existence, who could have a claim upon him; confessing that he was the son of a certain planter in Jamaica, long since dead, by a Mulatto wench, who was his property, and that he was entirely the founder of his own fortune, which, if certain circumstances had not occurred, was once, as he was given to understand, bequeathed to the Lord Viscount Crowbery.—"Mark that," said Mr. Claypole; "the cunning man is caught in his own trap: how just are the ways of Providence!"

But now time pressed with Mr. L— for his departure; the carriage was called to the door, and the friend of human misery hastened away to soothe the pains of other sufferers, anxiously expecting their relief from his hands; it

was a parting much regretted by Sir Roger—"Well," cried he, "if I live to go to London, sick or well I will cultivate the acquaintance of that amiable gentleman.



CHAPTER IX. Bold Measures boldly avowed.
THE Reverend Mr. Claypole having duly pondered these extraordinary occurrences in his mind, found himself not the less attracted towards Henry on the score of his good fortune; for in that gentleman's estimate of his character, prosperity was regarded as no contemptible recommendation; and he very justly considered, that Mr. Blachford's great property would not make him one whit the worse husband to his niece, or his niece the less affectionate wife to him. Still the circumstance of his hasty departure with Captain Cary, and the wild idea of volunteering with him, as stated in his letter to Sir Roger Manstock, seemed to augur so ill for Fanny, that he much doubted if that good understanding

between them, of which she had so confidently boasted, subsisted any where but in her sanguine imagination; neither could he with all his sagacity discover more than one reason for a young man's running away from the woman that made love to him, and that reason was not very compatible with Fanny's report aforesaid: as soon therefore as he could find a fair opportunity of drawing her into private conference, he began to open upon the subject of her attachment; he stated to her what, upon common report, the property of Mr. Blachford was supposed to amount to, which, upon the most moderate calculation, he guessed could not be less than twice as much as her own.—"I care little about that," cried Fanny, "the man is my object."—This was very candidly admitted as the first but not the only point to be considered in a connection for life: they could certainly, with proper discretion, live very comfortably upon their joint means, not losing sight in the mean time of future contingencies from Lady Crowbery, whose life, he observed with great regret, could not but be very precarious, as change of climate was generally the last desperate resource for constitutions, like her's, in deep decay.

Here Fanny again put him by, declaring, that she looked to no prospects but the prospect of possessing the dear man of her heart. Mr. Claypole's candour again admitted, that all this was quite natural, and bespoke a very sincere affection; but he could not exactly see the necessity why it should be altogether so disinterested.—"Because," replied that generous young lady, "if he was the veriest beggar upon earth I would marry him; nay, I must marry him."—"Must," repeated Claypole inquisitively; "is there a necessity in the case?"—"To be sure there is," cried Fanny, nothing abashed, "after what has pass'd between us; after all his faithful promises, all the rapturous caresses he lavish'd upon me, when my fears and swoonings in the storm last night threw me in his power, and expos'd me to the prying eyes of Miss Manstock, whilst I was lock'd in his embraces. What wou'd she say of me? what wou'd the world, what wou'd you yourself pronounce upon my reputation, were I not to be his wife?"


"You alarm me," cried Mr. Claypole, "has the villain dar'd—"
"Villain do you call him!" exclaimed the angry fair one,—"he is no villain; but the most honourable, the most

lovely and adorable of mankind. Do you think him capable of exposing me to the malice of this family, where I will not stay another night, though I travel hence on foot to seek a lodging?"—"Indeed, child, you terrify me," repeated he; "by this vehemence of expression I should almost fear that you have been betray'd into dangerous and improper concessions, through excess of love operating on the natural weakness of your sex, and conspiring with the temptations of opportunity. Let me know the worst at once, that I may obtain that instant reparation, which your character and my honour demand of the seducer. Your unsuspecting nature is not aware of the danger you are in; you trust to promises often lavish'd in the heat of passion, and as often violated in the coolness of reflection. You are yet to learn, that this young gentleman has written to Sir Roger Manstock a farewel letter, in which he tells him he is going out to sea with Captain Cary. Is that a proof of love? Is that consistent with his promises? Can a secession like this be reconcil'd to honour? And where is your hope of a speedy union with a man who is flying from you and his country?"


"Ridiculous alarm!" exclaimed the indignant

damsel; "who tells you all this idle tale? Henry is only doing what I myself shall do; flying from this odious house, where Isabella's jealous eyes wou'd look him out of countenance, as they would fain do by me; but I defy such feeble spite, for I have Henry fast as vows can bind him: he fly from me and his country! No, were he not too honourable he is too wise for that, too fond, too much a friend to himself. As for what he writes to Sir Roger Manstock, 'tis a mere blind, a concerted matter between us; he said last night he wou'd not pass another day in Manstock house; he has fulfill'd his word, and this contrivance extricates him from an uneasy situation, and gives no offence. I understand it all, and if you'll only help to place me somewhere within his reach and out of their's, from whose intrusion he escapes, my life upon it I will lure him back."

A confidence so strongly vouched seemed to have due effect upon the good man, whose tender feelings for his niece had given him such alarm; his countenance cleared up, and having ruminated a while upon the case, he took a more placid tone, and said—"Well, niece, I have turn'd it over in my thoughts, and do agree with you, that 'twill be better for

you to remove from hence, especially as the Lady Crowbery is expected, with whom you have little or no acquaintance, and therefore the best plea in the world for civilly stepping out of the way from a family meeting of so interesting and melancholy a sort. I, who have ont the same excuse, will remain where I am, and you shall have my parsonage house to yourself in the meanwhile; there are servants in it, and all things ready to receive you. You know, my dear, how greatly it concerns me to avoid any chance of a misunderstanding with my worthy friend Sir Roger, therefore you must be content to let me state matters to him in such a light as may make a merit of your going; and this corresponds not only with my regard to him, but also with my views as to myself, for I am not out of hope, through his interest with the Lady Patroness, to obtain the nomination to Ratcliffe's valuable living, which is yet undispos'd of."


"I know nothing about that," replied Fanny, with a careless air; "but if I can have the parsonage to myself, with no jealous Miss to overlook me, I desire nothing more; I will be answerable for all the rest."—"It shall be so then," said this compliant uncle; "the

house shall be your own; and may success attend your laudable and virtuous endeavours: for in truth, my dear, if I was not fully persuaded, that this worthy young man wou'd make you an excellent husband, especially since this unexpected good fortune has fallen upon him, I wou'd be the last man living to do what I do for the promotion of the match. I am a great friend to young people, and make all the allowances in reason for those pardonable weaknesses that proceed from mutual fondness for each other. I have felt the force of love myself in former days, and remember what it was; I am therefore doubly urg'd to be active in your cause, both from zeal to forward your wishes and real approbation of the object they point at. With this view it strikes me as a proper measure to step over to Crowbery to-morrow, where I can hardly fail of meeting our young friend the heir, and at the same time that I can impart any message or letter you may wish to send, I can avail myself of the opportunity for paying my respects to Lady Crowbery, and attending her upon her way to Manstock House, if that is found acceptable."


"I approve of the proposal much," replied

the Lady, "and will write to Henry: if he remains an hour at Crowbery, after he has receiv'd my letter, he is not the man I take him for."

These measures being so agreed, Mr. Claypole's next business was to seek his friend Sir Roger, whom he very opportunely met, taking a solitary walk in the grove. Claypole's thoughts were ready arranged, and it was without difficulty he found words for them, and proper address to make his proposal of removing Fanny acceptable to his friend Sir Roger; nay, he was so explicit in stating particulars, and so little sparing of his niece's reputation, in the account he gave of her nightly interview with our hero in the gallery, that the worthy Baronet drew exactly those conclusions which Claypole wished to lead him to, saw and acknowledged the propriety of removing Fanny out of the house, and expressed himself much indebted to his candid friend for the delicacy of the measure. At the same time he was not wanting in all due sensibility on behalf of that friend, and just resentment against Henry for his share in the transaction. If he did not inveigh against him quite so bitterly on this occasion, as his conduct might seem to merit, it

was because he did not see it in the light of an absolute seduction, having been a witness to Fanny's flippant behaviour towards our hero, and being conscious moreover, that he had something to accuse himself of for the conversation he had held with Henry in the chaise, which possibly might have inspired him with the first idea of assailing a virtue, that, according to his own report of it, had no right to be greatly respected, much less to be considered as absolutely impregnable.
These reflections, which in some degree caus'd his anger to abate, did not however prevent him from considering Henry's conduct in its true light, and resenting it as a breach of that decorum, which he had a right to expect from a young man admitted into his family under such circumstances. He still found himself called upon, by all the laws of friendship and hospitality, to co-operate in every measure that Claypole could propose for obtaining reparation for the indignity, and when he understood that marriage was the point in view, he declared himself determined to enforce justice, if it became necessary, by resorting to his niece Lady Crowbery, and employing her authority over Henry, in aid of his own, for that purpose.

This Mr. Claypole begged might be suspended for a while, and at the same time took occasion to open his scheme of going over to Crowbery the next morning, in search of the young man.—"And so you shall," cried the good man, "and my chaise shall be at your service, with every thing else that you can say on my part, to convince him of the sense I entertain of his conduct, and to further your appeal for justice to your niece. If he has still the hardiness to withstand you, and shall attempt to run out to sea with my nephew Cary, I warrant I have that influence with Jack as will not suffer him to escape us by that channel at least."—"I don't pretend to justify my niece in all particulars," said Claypole; "but a lady's honour is not to be sported with, and he has certainly made her a firm promise of marriage; but then, I must observe, it was a promise made upon the spur of passion, and (which is more alarming) made when her fortune was a greater object to him than it has now eventually become."—"In that particular," cried Sir Roger, "I do not agree with you. Henry, amongst all his failings, is not a mercenary lover; and I must believe that Miss Claypole's fortune is neither more nor less in his thoughts, for any thing that has

happen'd to him; and if I am not greatly mistaken in his character, he is an honourable lad, and will not go back from any promise he has given. If Miss Claypole makes a true report, and he has pass'd his word to her, I think the marriage is secure; if it is not a case of honour, but of choice, I hold it to be doubtful."

Here the dialogue ended, and the friends separated, Sir Roger to prolong his walk, Claypole to resume his meditations.


CHAPTER X. More bad Tidings of our degraded Hero.
IT is time now to attend upon my hero, who, though degraded in character, is in train to be so advanced in fortune's favour, that he has one claim at least upon my attention, which does not pass for nothing with the world at large.
The chaise, in which he was conveyed with his friend Cary from those once happy scenes, now forfeited and forsaken, made such rapid progress, that he soon found himself within sight of Crowbery Castle, proudly towering over its

dependant village, which spread itself along the vale. Here, in a narrow lane, our travellers were encountered by a gentleman on horse-back, who had a fowling-piece in his hand, and was followed by a brace of pointers. The pass was so strait that civility required the gentlemen in the carriage to stop their drivers. Whilst Cary was giving these orders, he discovered the person of Captain Crowbery, and instantly addressed him by his name. Henry had recognized him at the same instant, and determined to let him know he was informed of his designs, eagerly cried out,—"When you are at leisure, Captain Crowbery, I shall be glad to have a word with you."

The chaise had stopt opposite to a gate, which led to a field, and made a recess in the lane, where Crowbery had taken post for the convenience of passing. He knew the person of our hero, and this abrupt salutation was answered by a demand upon Henry to explain himself; this explanation was immediately given in terms that required no further illustration, and with a degree of heat that Cary vainly attempted to moderate. Want of spirit was not amongst Crowbery's defects; and in the hearing of the Captain, to whom all the particulars

were so fully known, it wou'd have been in vain for him, had he been so disposed, to have disavowed the plot he had projected against the person of our hero. This he did not attempt, but on the contrary retorted upon Henry with expressions not less hostile than those he had made use of.—"Dismount," cried Henry; "I have pistols in the chaise:" immediately the door was flung open, and he was upon his feet with the weapons in his hand. Crowbery made no delay; the word was given to follow, and they rushed into the adjoining field together. Cary raised his voice to no purpose, exclaiming,—"Gentlemen, you are too hasty; this matter may be explain'd; suffer me to interpose." By this time they had taken their distance, and each with a pistol in his hand had levelled at his opponent, Crowbery calling out to fire: Henry gave fire at the instant, and the ball passed through Crowbery's coat, which was unbuttoned.—"You have miss'd me," he cried, and immediately discharged his pistol in the air."—"Now I am ready," added he, "to express my regret for what I have done, if that will satisfy you; if not, we will repeat the operation till the offence is cancelled: I wou'd have made atonement at first; but the honour

of a soldier will not permit him to apologize to any one, who with a weapon in his hand calls him out for satisfaction, and precludes an explanation."


'Tis enough," cried Cary; "your behaviour, Captain Crowbery, does honour to yourself and your corps: I am sure my friend is perfectly satisfied."—"With every thing but myself," replied Henry;" "but that I have aim'd at Captain Crowbery's life without exposing my own to the same danger is a painful reflection, that I shall not easily get rid of."—At this moment Mr. L— came up, and his chaise being entangled in the same defile, he got out upon the report of the pistol, and ran with all speed to the place of action. As soon as he had seen a reconciliation between the parties perfectly effected, he drew Henry aside, and communicated to him the intelligence he had in charge from Blachford, of which the reader is already informed.
Henry stood rapt in deep attention, pondering upon an event so strange and unlooked for, till Mr. L—, having clearly detailed the whole account, with all particulars leading to it, ceased from speaking. Henry now perceived it was expected of him to reply, and

began by returning thanks to Mr. L— for the communication he had given him, which, he observed, was of a sort so extraordinary, that if he had received it from authority less respectable, he should scarce have given credit to it, considering it only as the vapour of a delirium, to which no rationality could be affixed, and of course he should have treated the deed as nugatory and illegal—"But to you, Sir" added he, 'and to the other gentlemen, who attest his capacity, I must give perfect credit. Certain it is that Mr. Blachford, in his dealings with me, has something to repent of; but it is as certain I needed not to be stimulated to forgiveness by any other bribe than the satisfaction of giving ease to the compunctious feelings of a dying man, as you describe him to be: I shall instantly attend upon him according to his desire, and to the conclusions I may draw from that interview I must refer my final resolution."

This said, they parted, Mr. L— proceeding on his way towards Manstock House, Henry to the cottage of his friend Ezekiel, where Captain Cary set him down, and pursued his journey.
It was still early morning; Ezekiel however was up and alone, and had just saluted

the nostrils of Aurora with his morning pipe; the smoke that curled round his head did not prevent him from recognizing the face of his friend; he drew the tube from his mouth, and greeted him with his usual welcome: he began immediately upon the business of Blachford, in which Henry gave him no interruption, though the detail was sufficiently verbose and circumstantial, in the course of which he did not forget to interweave many pious calls and admonitions to a worthy use of the great and unexpected good fortune that had befallen him.
When Henry had heard him to an end, he made a very proper acknowledgment of the obligations he was under to him for his zealous and kind services. In this part of his discourse, he expressed himself with warmth and animation; but when he came to speak of his own immediate interest in Blachford's intended bequest, the reflections he had brought with him from Manstock House weighed so heavy on his spirits, that his language sunk below indifference. This was matter of surprise to honest Daw, who knew not that his friend had to lament a loss, by the forfeiture of Isabella's esteem, which no worldly wealth or prosperity

could compensate; he was therefore instant with him not to put on an assumed contempt for the good things of this life, which were only then to be despised when they were unworthily employed; moderation, he observed, was much to be commended, but insensibility was a degradation of our nature. To a remark so little applicable to his case, Henry made no reply, but grasping the hand of the good man, who was sitting beside him, and watching his countenance at this moment, he exclaimed—"By my soul, Ezekiel, thou hast the kindest, best, and worthiest heart in nature, and when hard fate shall separate us, as soon it will, by Heavens! the parting from you will make a woman of me, so much do I love and honour you."

Ezekiel stared wildly at him for a moment, then drew the pipe full smoking from his mouth, whiffed away what he had drawn from it with an indignant air, and dashed it on the hearth to atoms.—"Parting!" he exclaimed; "by the life of Pharaoh, I will never part from thee!"—Then rising suddenly from his seat, and stretching himself up upon his insteps, he assumed a posture so militarily perpendicular, and at the same time pursed his

brow into a frown that marked such determined resolution, that our hero, gazing with astonishment upon a figure at once so enthusiastic and so grotesque, waited in suspense till the oracle should utter his definitive response.—"Set forward," at length cried Ezekiel, "set forward, I say, young man, when thou wilt, with the blessing of the Lord, I am ready to accompany thee."

Ezekiel's mind was not made to embrace more than one object at a time, if that was an interesting one; in friendship more especially his ideas were too ardent to be at leisure for any other subject collaterally, so that he had just now consigned Blachford and his legacy to absolute oblivion; neither did he keep his offer back till enquiry could be made of Henry, whither he was going, and why he was going at all, but having quitted his wicker chair, and disposed of his tobacco pipe, by shivering it into fragments, he strode to the corner of the kitchen, where he seized hold of his faithful crabstock, and brandishing it with a gallant air, declared himself forthwith ready to begin his march.—"Hold," cried Henry, smiling, "have patience, my good friend; our's is no short trip, and methinks

you are not equipt for a long one."—That's true, that's true," replied Ezekiel, "I protest to you my apparel had escap'd me."—And indeed, unless an old black and white stuff night gown, with a woollen cap on his head, and worn-out shoes cut into slippers on his feet, might be called the proper trim of a traveller, honest Ezekiel was at this moment no otherwise provided.

"But you forget," said Henry, "Mr. Blachford and his business."—"Ods my life," quoth Daw, "as sure as can be it had slipt my memory, and now it comes into my mind that I shou'd have asked you whither it is that you are going, and how it comes to pass that you are posting away just when fortune is dropping into your lap: these, do you see, friend Henry, are very natural questions, and my only wonder is, how it came about that they did not occur to me before."—"'Tis all in good time," quoth Henry, "for, if I can prevail, you shall not set a foot without these doors on my account. With the officer, who accompanied me hither in the chaise, I am going out of England."—"Well, well," resumed the good man, "if thou art going in a good cause, were it to circumnavigate the globe, I'll not

flinch from my word. Dost think, because I am a man of peace, I am therefore not a man of spirit? But whither art thou bound? Is it to fight the enemies of our country? Be it so! The danger thou can'st face I shall not fly from."—"I know I may depend upon your secresy," said Henry, "therefore I shall not disguise from you my intentions: Lady Crowbery is ordered to Lisbon."—"And dost thou think of going with her?" cried Ezekiel.—"Not so," replied Henry, "for I shall take my passage by another conveyance."

Here the preacher shook his head, which, being noticed by our hero—"Banish all these horrid notions," he cried; "banish them for ever! Let it not enter into your heart to conceive that my motives are not pious, and my duties sacred. You would have followed me to prison, being a stranger to you and a culprit; she is a guiltless sufferer, my friend and benefactress; shall I do less for her, and be a monster of ingratitude?"—"Thou shalt not," quoth honest Daw; "if gratitude be thy motive; I will travel with a grateful man to the world's utmost limit, nay, beyond it, for I pronounce, that gratitude is a lovely virtue, it is, it is—but I have now no time to tell thee

what it is; I will speak more fully of it on another occasion. But hark thee, friend of mine, thou must also be regardful of thine interests in this Blachford: he is a dying man, and shou'd'st thou not be present when he breathes his last, the harpies may lay hold of his effects, and thou may'st be defrauded of some part at least of that property, which is lawfully to devolve to thee."—"Whatever may be the consequence," replied Henry, "I shall not put interest in the balance against conscience. I must perform my duty to Lady Crowbery; and if you will remain here, and act on my behalf upon the spot, all will be well; and, in fact, my friend, as you have been the moving cause of all this unlooked for good fortune, I have a claim upon your kind offices, for completing what you have begun."—"Very well," replied Daw, "we shall see what is to be done after you have visited the sick man; in the mean time I will go and apparel myself for the day."




CHAPTER XI. A Death-bed Dialogue, in which some Readers will think there is much Folly, others much Honour, on the Part of our Hero.
WHILST Ezekiel Daw was ascending to his cock-loft, and before Henry had set out upon his visit to Blachford, Doctor Zachary Cawdle, returning from his patient at the next door, entered the cottage. As soon as he espied our hero—"Welcome, welcome," he exclaimed, "thou child of good fortune; sure the skies rain gold for you; here's a chance, and a change! Marry, the times are strangely altered, Henry, since you and I first met. Why this justice of our's is indeed a justice at last, and honest Ezekiel the preacher has once in his life preach'd to some purpose; I have only made a hole in the head of my patient, he has open'd his heart. And so you are now the 'Squire of Crowbery, heir to his whole fortune, a few legacies excepted, one of which I am sure you will not regret, a small bequest to Susan May, to balance old accompts: but what gratifies me above all is, that he has entirely cut this good-for-nothing

Peer out of his will, who stood heir to his whole property before this blow upon his scull brought my patient to a better recollection. Death and Ezekiel together have wrought a wonderful reformation."

When Zachary had rambled on in this strain for some time, Henry, who had paid little or no attention to what he had been saying, demanded if it was now a proper time for him to pay his visit to Mr. Blachford? Zachary replied, that he had just then been dressing his wound, and wou'd recommend him to wait a few minutes before he presented himself for admission.—"Sit down then," cried Henry, "if you please, and satisfy my anxious curiosity on a subject infinitely more interesting to me, than all my expectations from Mr. Blachford, had he the wealth of the Indies to bestow." He then began a course of enquiries relative to his mother, which, with Zachary's circumstantial answers, and certain occasional digressions, into which his professional vanity betrayed him, held on the conversation till it was time for him to repair to Blachford. He had, however, in the course of this conversation, commissioned Zachary to report to his mother every thing that he wished her to be

informed of, respecting the time he should pass in attendance upon Blachford, and the resolution he had taken of repairing to Lisbon, in the hope of paying his duty to her there: he was very particular in guarding against mistakes, and repeated his instructions so frequently, and with such precision, that Zachary, who did not just then call to mind all the reasons for his caution, began to feel offended at his manner, and asked him, if he could not trust his memory for conveying a simple message?—"I shou'd have thought so," replied Henry, "if you had not, most unfortunately for me, let it fail you in the matter of the little packet, which you was to deliver to me from may mother."—He then proceeded to explain to him the importance of that paper, the opportunity he had lost by not possessing it in time, and the fatal consequences that had nearly ensued upon his altercation with the person it alluded to. Zachary heard all this with astonishment, and after bestowing upon himself a very plentiful proportion of blockheads and boobies, promised that he would spare no pains to atone for his mistake, by enquiring out Mr. Delapoer, when he should arrive in London with Lady Crowbery; and

he despaired not but intelligence could there be obtained of him, if he was actually in England, as Lady Crowbery supposed, of which, however, he declared, for his part, he took leave to doubt. And now the time being come when the Doctor judged his patient might be accessible, he asked Henry if he had set his thoughts in order for an interview; and being answered that he was ready to accompany him, he rose from his seat, when Henry, recollecting himself on a sudden, stopt, and taking him by the button, said—"One word more if you please before we part: I think you said there was a legacy bequeathed to Susan May, and that it was to balance old accompts: I prythee, my good friend, tell me, if it is no inviolable secret, what those old accompts are which Blachford has to balance."—"Humph!" quoth the accoucheur, "it was an account of about nine months standing, and such a one as sometimes falls into my hands to audit; if you can guess at it you may, but we reveal no secrets of this sort, 'tis against the freemasonry of our order."—"Well then," said Henry, "I know it, but you did not tell me. Blachford, we will suppose, seduc'd Susan May, and had a child by her; is it not so?—"I must confess," replied

the Doctor, "there is as fine a boy now alive, of somebody's producing, as ever I usher'd into the world, yourself not excepted, and, to the best of my belief, his Worship has the honour of being the father of it; 'tis but right, therefore, you see, that some provision should be made for its maintenance, and, if I am not mistaken, it is to the exact amount of forty pounds a year, charg'd upon the estate, which I dare say you will not think unreasonable."

Here Zachary made a pause; but Henry remaining silent, he proceeded—"You will hear this from Blachford himself, in which case I shall be acquitted of the secret; but, as we have kept it close hitherto, I am persuaded you will not let it get out, to the prejudice of the poor girl in her place, for I think she will hardly be so foolish as to throw that up voluntarily on account of this legacy."—Henry asked if this was all Blachford had done for the mother and child? Zachary assured him that, to the best of his remembrance, there was no other incumbrance on their account; it was a case of conscience, he observed, and though he believed they had been upon no terms of intimacy for some time part, yet, for his own

part he should have given very little credit to Blachford's reformation, if he had gone out of the world, and taken no notice of a poor girl, whom he had reason to suspect was trepanned into the scrape by very unfair practices; and though perhaps she was somewhat of the wildest afterwards, as Henry himself probably could witness, yet whom had she to thank for it but her seducer?

"Tis enough," cried Henry; "I am ready to attend you to Mr. Blachford's."

After waiting a few minutes in a lower room, whilst the Doctor went up stairs to announce his arrival, our hero was admitted to the sick man's chamber: he was lying on his couch, supported by pillows, and upon Henry's entering, Zachary and the nurse retired. One small ray of light was let into the room, which served to guide the steps of our hero through the gloom, who had been desired to tread with great caution, and to speak low, as the least jar was intolerable to the aching brain of the wounded man. A chair was placed close to the couch, at the right hand of Blachford, who made a sign to his visitor to seat himself in it. This he accordingly did, treading lightly and with care as he moved towards it.

A silence for some time was observed by both parties, Blachford holding his handkerchief to his eyes the whilst. At last, speaking in a feeble tone, he said—"I am afraid and asham'd to look upon you; I fear it is not possible you can forgive me, and, if you cou'd, how can I hope—" Here something seemed to choak his speech, and he broke off. Henry waited awhile in compassionate attention, but finding him relapsing into his former debility, with his handkerchief again held to his eyes, he thought it time to speak, and addressed him as follows;—"Mr. Blachford, I do beseech you to believe, that what I am about to say to you is not dictated by any interested motives, but springs freely and voluntarily from my heart, influenced only by an unfeigned commiseration for the state in which I find you, and a firm reliance on the sincerity of your contrition. For whatever you have done or meditated against me, I do most entirely and from my soul forgive you."


"You are infinitely kind and compassionate," said Blachford, faintly; "but I have been the cruellest of monsters towards you, not only in the dark business that has brought me to this condition, but in the matter of the trial,

where I wou'd fain have suppress'd the evidence that so clearly acquitted you: but this is not all; it was I who set Lord Crowbery upon you; I was the tale-bearer from that wretched woman Mrs. Cawdle, that made him furious against you and his unhappy lady, who, I dare say, was falsely slander'd and unjustly persecuted through my means; I have all her sufferings on my conscience; I am weigh'd down by offences. Alas! what will become of me? and what atonement can I now make to you in the first place? what to that injur'd Lady, whose health, fame, happiness, have been sacrific'd to my malice? for it was the very demons of malice, envy and jealousy, that possess'd me against you, and through you against her. All that I can do is all too little; yet what I can I have done. I know I can expect no mercy from Heaven, if I do not strive to repair the wrongs I have done upon earth. Justice demands that I should do my best to make that life happy, which I have attempted to destroy: Heaven grant that my endeavours may succeed! Poverty at least you need no longer dread; by this deed you are heir to all I am possess'd of, and, be assur'd, most excellent young man, that if conscience

did not force me to the act, choice and opinion in your favour wou'd now lead me to it freely and voluntarily, for I am confident you deserve it, and long, long may you enjoy it!"


"If I am to receive this," said Henry, (taking the will that Blachford tendered to him) "as an act of justice and atonement, which your conscience impels you to discharge, I certainly shall not oppose myself to your will and pleasure; but before I acquiesce in a deed that accumulates all your atonement upon me alone, I shou'd know, and be convinc'd, there are no other injur'd persons who have better claims upon it; nay, give me leave to say, who have any claims. You well observ'd just now, that you cou'd expect no mercy from Heaven, if you did not strive to repair the wrongs you have done upon earth; it was a becoming sentiment, and I believe I repeat it nearly, if not correctly, in your own words; suffer me, therefore, I conjure you, by your hope in Heaven, to put it closely to your conscience, whether you have repair'd all wrongs committed against others as fully and sufficiently as you have those committed against me?"

The sick man paused, as one employed in recollection; at last he said, he thought he

could reply with a safe conscience, that he had made proportionable restitution to all claimants on the score of injuries—"One of that description," said he, "you will find remember'd in my will; an acquaintance of your own, Susan May by name; I have burthen'd you with a provision of forty pounds a year for her life."


"And why have you so done?" said Henry. "Because—because," replied Blachford, "I have extorted favours from her she did not voluntarily grant, and thereby encumber'd her with difficulties and expences which this annuity will amply satisfy. Ah! my dear Sir!" added he, "this was the severest tug of all I had to struggle with; for that girl has been the cruel cause of all my misery. I was infatuated with her charms, I doated upon her to distraction; but as soon as she set her eyes on you, she turn'd them from me with loathing and abhorrence. This was horror to my heart: this it was that made me surious to revenge myself on you: 'twas jealousy, outrageous jealousy, that inspir'd me to attempt your life: judge, therefore, what I had to combat, before I cou'd persuade myself to make atonement to one, whom in reason I regarded as rather bound to atone to me, for all the pains and sorrows that

have embitter'd my sad cup, and brought me to this lamentable state of body and of mind."


"You have an infant son by her," said Henry.—"You know it then, it seems," replied the sick man; "I have a son by her; at least I think he is my son; and in that persuasion nature had it's share of influence for softening my resentment, and inducing me to make provision for a helpless innocent."


"What must that nature be," cried Henry, "which does not feel this influence? But you have us'd the word resentment; I pray you Sir, inform me rightly of your cause of resentment against this young woman; Did she seduce you, or you her?"


"You know her well, I dare say, Sir," said Blachford; "you must have had possession of her frequently."


"Never, I take Heaven to witness; never, by all that's sacred," exclaimed Henry, elevating his voice rather above the pitch proper for his situation.

"You astonish me," said the other; may I indeed believe you?"


"As confidently as you believe in Heaven. She is innocent for me; I shou'd be happy for your conscience sake cou'd you say as much

with the same truth; for yet you have not answer'd to the question of seduction, on which, as I conceive, the whole of your responsibility must turn, and by that you ought to measure and proportion your atonement."


"Then I will answer you," returned Blachford, sighing, "and discharge my troubled conscience by confession of the whole proceedding. Seduction base as hell was practis'd by my agent to submit her to my desires; my housekeeper, a woman corrupted to my purposes, invited this girl, then sixteen years of age, and lovely as an angel, to her room in my house; there she caress'd her, treated her with dainties, such as she, poor thing, had never tasted, gave her rich cordials, persuading her of their harmless quality, and so, in fine, intoxicated her by surprise: that moment was her ruin: devil as I was, in that state of insensibility I accomplish'd my vile purpose. The intoxication pass'd off, and the recovery of her senses disclos'd the injury she had suffer'd; her agonies were strong, and her reproaches vehement; but soothings, presents, promises, were lavishly bestow'd, and in conclusion took effect: she was poor, and vain of her fair person; I was not wanting to profit of that vanity,

and I gave her means to deck herself out in a style that put down all her rivals in the village. The good dame, her mother, it is true, was alarm'd; but I took means to lull her suspicions, and she liv'd rent-free in her cottage: I don't say she accommodated me in my intrigue, but she was credulous in the extreme, and my professions, jointly with my favours, blinded her effectually. Susan recover'd her spirits, and I, by a collusion with that sorry jade, whom honest Cawdle is condemn'd to call wife, put Susan into her service, removing her from under the eye of her mother and that worthy soul Ezekiel Daw, who liv'd with her. Here I had free access; but dearly paid by occasional civilities to that disgustful sot her mistress. At nine months end from my first knowledge of her she bore this boy; Zachary brought him into the world, and the affair was secretly so manag'd as to create no suspicion, even in her mother. It is a lovely boy, and I put him out to nurse, providing for his maintenance, and frequently visiting him. Here then you have my full confession: let Susan therefore enjoy her annuity, which I can well believe you think she fully deserves; and suffer me to hope you will protect and be a father to my helpless child."



"Hear me!" cried Henry, "and let me implore you to have regard for your departing soul: I am myself, like your poor innocent, a son of nature, born out of marriage, thrown upon the world without inheritance, and unacknowledg'd by the laws of man; yet I have found a friend that leaves me nothing to regret, when I decline your bounty, which here I solemnly declare, calling my God to witness, I peremptorily renounce in favour of your son. Bequeath not your own child to a stranger; make not me your intermediate instrument of justice, but plead your own atonement at the throne of mercy, and delay not for a moment to mitigate the wrath of that just judge, who will not spare the parent that abandons his own offspring."


"Oh horrible!" cried Blachford, "you tear my heart asunder."


"Not so," Henry answered, lowering his voice; "I'll heal it, soften it, comfort it. You shall live happily, or die in peace; and never will I quit this place till you consent to what I ask. 'Tis for your sake I intercede; it is to awaken nature in your heart, and reconcile you to your God, that I thus earnestly conjure you to strike out my name from this mistaken paper, and adopt your son."



"Mysterious, wonderful young man!" cried Blachford; "I do not know your name; the blanks are left for you to fill."


"Then fill them with the name that naturally shou'd fill them. Send for your infant and his mother; I'll be your messenger. Enjoy the gratifying sight of those whom you make happy, and let me be not your heir, but the executor of your will, and the guardian of your son; then I will call you just; then and only then I will honour your memory, and record you as my friend and benefactor."


"Do with me as you will," cried Blachford; "your generosity overcomes me; I sicken and am faint; language fails me: I commit myself to your disposal."

Our hero said no more; his suit was granted; joy swelled his benevolent heart; he rose from his seat, cast a look of pity on the dying man and departed.


END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

VOL. III.

Ficta voluptatis causâ sint proxima veris,
Nec quodcunque volet poscat sibi fabula credi.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR CHARLES DILLY, IN THE POULTRY. 1795.



CONTENTS.

BOOK THE SEVENTH.
CHAP. I. An humble Apology for Authors in general, with some modest Hints at their peculiar Usefulness Page 1
CHAP. II. Our Hero undergoes a strict Examination by a certain Judge called Conscience Page 10
CHAP. III. Our Hero undergoes a second Examination by a, certain Judge, with whom Conscience has no concern Page 19
CHAP. IV. The Decree of the Judge without Conscience is reversed Page 32
CHAP. V. Our Hero is admitted to an unexpected Conference Page 36
CHAP. VI. The Conference is interrupted, resumed, and concluded Page 47
CHAP. VII. The Penitent on his Death-bed atones to Justice Page 55

CHAP. VIII. An Incident of the tragic Cast Page 71
CHAP. IX. Surgeon's Work Page 84
CHAP. X. Our wounded Hero bleeds afresh Page 93


BOOK THE EIGHTH.
CHAP. I. An old Man's Prattle in a wintry Night Page 109
CHAP. II. The best Friends must part Page 116
CHAP. III. Our Hero goes out to Sea Page 128
CHAP. IV. A certain interested Gentleman meets with a Rebuff Page 142
CHAP. V. Let Innocence beware! Spring-guns and Man-traps are laid in these Premises! Page 151
CHAP. VI. Cunning can hold off Detection for awhile Page 163
CHAP. VII. Let the Man, who suspects, resort speedily to Explanation Page 173
CHAP. VIII. She, who confesses less than the Whole, may save a Blush, but will incur a Danger Page 181
CHAP. IX. A tempting Offer honourably withstood Page 195

CHAP. X. Where is the Daughter, that may not take a Lesson from our Heroine? Page 205
CHAP. XI. A pious Mind resorts to Providence for its Support Page 212


BOOK THE NINTH.
CHAP. I. A short Interlude between the Acts Page 219
CHAP. II. An Adventure on board a Frigate Page 223
CHAP. III. Our Hero makes an interesting Discovery Page 232
CHAP. IV. First Love strikes deep Page 238
CHAP. V. Our Hero quits the Sea Page 245
CHAP. VI. Friends long divided meet at last Page 254
CHAP. VII. Our Hero is restored to both his Parents Page 267
CHAP. VIII. A gentle Being drops into the Grave Page 276
CHAP. IX. Our History presents a Scene not very flattering to human Nature Page 281
CHAP. X. The Scene is shifted to Manstock House Page 291
CHAP. XI. A Gleam of Hope suddenly reversed Page 301





HENRY.

BOOK THE SEVENTH.

CHAPTER I. An Humble Apology for Authors in general, with some modest Hints at their peculiar Usefulness.
I HOPE the candid reader now and then calls to mind how much more nimbly he travels over these pages than the writer of them did. When our dullness is complained of, it would be but charity in him to reflect how much pains that same dullness has cost us; more, he may be assured, than our brighter intervals, where we sprung nimbly forward with an easy weight, instead of toiling like a carrier's horse, whose slow and heavy pace argues the load he draws, and the labour he endures: alas! for us poor Novelists, if there was no mercy for dull authors, and our countrymen, like the barbarous Libethrians of old, should take it into their minds to banish music

and the muses out of the land, and murder every Orpheus that did not fiddle to their taste. They should consider, that the man, who makes a book, makes a very pretty piece of furniture; and if they will but consign us to a quiet station on a shelf, and give us wherewithal to cover us in a decent trim, the worst amongst us will serve to fill up the file, and stop a gap in the ranks.
'Tis hard indeed to toil, as we sometimes do, to our own loss and disappointment; to sweat in the field of fame, merely to reap a harvest of chaff, and pile up reams of paper for the worm to dine upon. It is a cruel thing to rack our brains for nothing, run our jaded fancies to a stand-still, and then lie down at the conclusion of our race, a carcase for the critics. And what is our crime all the while? A mere mistake between our readers and ourselves, occasioned by a small miscalculation of our capacities and their candour; all which would be avoided, if happily for us they had not the wit to find out our blunders, or, happily for them, had all that good nature for us that we generously exercise towards ourselves. If once they could bring their tempers to this charming complacency, they might depend

upon having books in plenty; authors would multiply like polypusses, and the press would be the happiest mother in the kingdom.
How many worthy gentlemen are there in this blessed island of our's, who have so much time upon their hands, that they do not know what to do with it? I am aware how large and respectable a portion of this enlightened nation center their delights in the chace, and draw an elegant resource from the sagacity of the hound and the vigour of the horse; but they cannot always be on the saddle; the elements they cannot command; and frost and snow will lock them up within their castle walls: there it is possible that solitude may surprise them, and dismiss them for a time to the solace of their own lucubrations: now, with all possible respect for these resources, I should think it may sometimes be worth their while to make experiment of other people's lucubrations, when they have worn out their own, for those must be but sorry thoughts, which are not better than not thinking at all; and the least they can gain by an author is a nap.
The ingenuity of man has invented a thousand contrivances for innocently disposing of

idle time; let us, therefore, who write books, have only the idlers on our side, in gratitude for the amusement we give them, and let the rest of the world be as splenetic as they will, we may set their spleen at naught; the majority will be with us.
If a querulous infant is stilled by a rattle, the maker of the rattle has saved somebody's ears from pain and persecution; grant, therefore, that a novel is nothing better than a toy for children of a larger growth and more unruly age, society has some cause to thank the writer of it; it may have put an aching head to rest; it may have cheered the debtor in his prison, or the country squire in a hard frost. Traders will cry up the commodity they deal in, therefore I do not greatly insist on the praises which some that write books have bestowed on book-writing, but I do observe, that great respect is paid to an author by those who cannot read him, wherefore I conclude, those who can read, and do not praise him, are only silent because they want words to express their admiration and gratitude; whilst those sanguine flatterers, who, in the excess of their respect for our persons, cry down our performances, give evident proof how much

higher they had pitched their expectations of what our talents would produce, than our productions could make good; but though in their zeal for our reputations, they tell us how ill we write, they seldom neglect at the same time to shew us how we might have written still worse.
Some over-wise people have pretended to discover, that this altercation between author and critic is nothing more than a mere plot and contrivance to play into each others hands, like Mountebank and Zany; but this is over-acted sagacity, and an affectation of finding more mysteries in the art of authorship, than really belong to it; for my part, I believe it is a business of a more simple nature than most which can be taken up, and that authors in general require nothing more than pen, ink, and paper to set up with. In ancient times, the trade was in few hands, and the work seems then to have been composed with much pains and forethought; materials were collected with great care, and put together with consummate accuracy and attention; every part was fitted to its place, polished to the heighth, and finished to perfection; there were inspectors on the part of the public, men

of sound judgment, and fully competent to the office, who brought the work to a standard of rule and measure, and insisted upon it, that every whole should have a beginning, a middle, and an end. Under these strict regulations the ancients wrote; but now that practice has made us perfect, and the trade is got into so many hands, these regulations are done away, and so far from requiring of us a beginning, middle, and end, it is enough if we can shew a head and a tail; and it is not always that even these can be made out with any tolerable precision. As our authors write with less labour, our critics review with less care, and for every one fault that they mark in our productions, there probably might be found one hundred that they overlook. It is an idle notion, however, to suppose that therefore they are in league and concert with the authors they revise; for where could that poor fraternity find a fund to compensate them for suffering a vocation once so reputable to fall into such utter disgrace under their management, as to be no longer the employ of a gentleman? As for our readers, on whom we never fail to bestow the terms of candid, gentle, courteous, and others of the like soothing cast, they certainly

deserve all the fair words we can give them, for it is not to be denied, but that we make occasionally very great demands upon their candour, gentleness, and courtesy, exercising them frequently and fully with such trials as require those several endowments in no small proportion. The farther I advance therefore in this work, the civiller I will be; and to those readers who shall follow me into this third volume, I may with justice apply the epithets of patient, persevering, faithful, and so on, with a crescendo in my strain, till the piece is concluded.
But are there not also fastidious, angry, querulential readers? readers with full stomachs, who complain of being surfeited and overloaded with the story-telling trash of our circulating libraries? It cannot be altogether denied, but still they are readers: if the load is so heavy upon them as they pretend it is, I will put them in the way of getting rid of it, by reviving the law of the ancient Cecertaeans, who obliged their artists to hawk about their several wares, carrying them on their backs, till they found purchasers to ease them of the burthen. Was this law put in force against authors, few of us, I doubt, would be

found able to stand under the weight of our own unpurchased works.
But whilst the public is contented with things as they are, where is the wonder if the reform is never made by us till they begin it in themselves? Let their taste lead the fashion, and our productions must accord to it. Whilst the Cookeries of Hannah Glass outcirculate the Commentaries of Blackstone, authors will be found, who prefer the compilation of receipts to that of records, as the easier and more profitable task of the two. If puerilities are pleasing, men will write ut pueris placeant.

When Demosthenes was engaged in the defence of a certain citizen of Athens, who was brought to trial upon a charge of a capital nature, neither the importance of the cause, nor the eloquence of the pleader, could fix the attention of the judges who were sitting on the trial: the orator, observing their levity, on a sudden stopt short in the midst of his harangue, and addressing himself to the court,—"Listen to me," he cried, "ye venerable judges, for a few moments, and I will tell you a merry tale:—A certain young man, having occasion to take a journey from this city

of our's to Megara, hir'd an ass for the job; but being extremely incommoded on the way by a scorching sun, which smote him with intolerable heat at noon, he dismounted from his beast, and made free to take post under the shade of his carcase: upon this the ass-owner, who accompanied him, remonstrated with great vehemence, contending that his ass was let for the journey simply and precisely, and that the service now required of him was extra-conditional and illegal: the traveller with equal vehemence maintain'd, that he was warranted in the use he made of him, and that having hir'd the ass in substance, he was intitled to the benefit of his shadow into the bargain: the question was open to controversy, and the parties went to trial on the case."—Here Demosthenes ceased, and taking up his brief, prepared to leave the court: the judges seeing this, called out to him to return and go on with his pleading.—"For shame, ye men of Athens," cried the indignant orator, "ye can lend your ears to the story of an ass, but will not bestow your attention upon a trial that involves the life or death of a fellow-citizen."




CHAPTER II. Our Hero undergoes a strict Examination by a certain Judge called Conscience.
AS soon as our hero had brought Blachford to consent to his disinterested proposal, he took immediate measures for securing the success of it. To bring the infant and its mother to an interview with the dying penitent was his first object. The woman, who had the child at nurse, did not live above two miles off, so that a messenger would soon fetch her over: Susan, indeed, was at a greater distance, but the day yet served for bringing her from Manstock; and Henry immediately sate down and wrote the following note:



Dear Susan,

A business, in which you are greatly interested, requires your presence in this place; Mr. Blachford's life is so precarious, that not an hour is to be lost: I recommend it to you therefore to state this to your amiable lady, and, with her permission, come away

directly in the chaise, that will attend for that purpose.

Your's sincerely, Henry.



Whilst Henry was writing this note, young Tom Weevil, who had got notice of his arrival, opportunely called upon him, and no sooner understood that he wanted a messenger to Manstock house, than he zealously tendered his services for that errand, and by Henry was instructed to ride to the next market town, which luckily was in the road, and there put himself into a post chaise for the purpose of conveying Susan in the most speedy and commodious manner.
This busines being thus adjusted, and another messenger dispatched for the nurse and child, our hero returned to the cottage, and throwing himself into Ezekiel's wicker chair, enjoyed for some minutes, in silent reflection, that heart-felt satisfaction, that only can result from self-approving conscience. As he meditated on the sacrifice he was now about to make, he felt a momentary gleam of virtuous exultation, which tempted him to cry out—"O Ratcliffe! dear departed friend! thou wou'd'st

have prais'd me for this deed, and if thy sainted spirit holds communication with me still, I know thou wilt regard it as a pledge of my obedience to thy fatherly instructions. But what is this I boast of? Nothing, compar'd to the severer trial that awaits me, and demands an effort strong indeed, a sacrifice from which my heart shrinks back with terror and dismay. Oh! be my guardian still; let thy protecting spirit strengthen my feeble nature, and inspire me with the resolution to fulfil the fatal promise I have made, and pay the forfeit of my folly.—Married to Fanny Claypole!—All hopes of happiness for ever blasted to repair her reputation wantonly expos'd.—Hard terms indeed, and heavy penalty I have exacted from myself in an unguarded moment; but the word is pass'd, and I must honourably make it good: and fit I shou'd, if that is the atonement she requires; for what but chance prevented the completion of my guilt? The meditation therefore in my instance is the act itself, and I am virtually her debtor to no less amount than for the loss of all that can be valuable to a modest woman. I know the plea that some wou'd make; her forwardness, her fondness, her allurements: if

this were good in any case, it wou'd be so in mine; but the excuse is mean and villainous; that and that only can be my acquittal, which acquits me to myself; this cannot serve the turn; my conscience never will be quieted by evasions. 'Tis true the act was frustrated; what then? I was not quite so abandon'd as to sin in presence of a warning angel: and can I ever lose the memory of that rebuke, which the offended purity of that angel justly bestowed? Oh, Isabella! how that frown made my heart sink within me! Never again shall I have confidence to look upon that lovely face, which till that moment ever greeted me with smiles. No more shall that sweet voice salute my ears like music, as it was won't to do in the still hour of evening, when we walk'd together: those happy hours are never to return again."

Zachary Cawdle now made his appearance, having returned from his visit to Lady Crowbery—"I bring you news," said he, "of our excellent lady, that will please you; her disorder seems abated, and I flatter myself she will gain strength and spirits to carry her through her journey both by land and sea: she sets out to-morrow in the forenoon for Manstock-house,

where she will repose herself for that night. I have her express commands to desire you will not fail to meet her there."—"I know not how that can be," said Henry. "She is very anxious it shou'd be, I can assure you," rejoined the Doctor, "and I believe she has very interesting matters to confer with you upon, for she said she must positively see you, as she cou'd not express all she had to say by letter; neither indeed do I hold it fit she shou'd exhaust herself in writing for any length of time. If it is your business with Mr. Blachford that stands in the way, I hope that may be dismissed before it will be necessary for you to set out to-morrow from this place."

Henry asked if her ladyship had said any thing on that subject. "Not much," Zachary replied; "she had noticed it but slightly, seeming to intimate a doubt whether it was matter of congratulation or not, which I confess," he added, "rather puzzled me to account for, as her ladyship cannot fail to know that our neighbour will, in the vulgar phrase, die fat; and let your expectations be what they may, surely a good fortune in hand is a good thing at all events."—"Most people are of that opinion," said Henry, "but her ladyship, perhaps,

may think otherwise."—"Whatever she thinks," replied Zachary, "I dare say she will keep it to herself, till she meets you, and converses with you at Manstock."

To this our hero made no further answer, but turned the discourse, by enquiring after Mrs. Cawdle.—"Her health," said the Doctor, "is no better, her temper much worse, and her enthusiasm more extravagant than ever. Blachford's situation seems to trouble her much; she has liv'd with him as a sinner, and wou'd now fain part from him like a saint; but he has refus'd all her tenders, and has given his conscience into Ezekiel's keeping: this mortifies her in a double sense, for she not only meant to send him out of the world in the true faith, but had an eye also to the good things he has to leave behind him, of which she had no objection to come in for a share; but, thanks to the fates! all that is otherwise dispos'd of. As to the state of her constitution, that is in a rapid decline from bad to worse, being only held together like a sinking vessel by the very elements that sap and undermine it. When I take my leave of her, as I shall do to-morrow, great chance if our's is not an everlasting farewell."


This said, Zachary took his leave, having many preparations to make for his approaching departure.
Henry was not sorry to be left to his reflections, for his mind was greatly embarrassed by the message he had received from Lady Crowbery. To present himself once more at Manstock-house was painful in the extreme; to disobey the commands of a mother on so interesting a summons was an alternative not to be thought of: how to avoid the one without transgressing the other was a point of difficulty that now engrossed his thoughts; and as for Zachary's concluding account of Jemima's melancholy condition, from that it is more than probable he had carried off very little, if any, information.
The great evil of all, that sunk deepest into his mind, was his engagement to Miss Claypole, a lady very little to his taste, and the consequent loss of all hope that had respect to Isabella, a lady, whom at his heart he most ardently admired and loved. The disgrace he had incurred with himself, as well as with her, in that fatal moment of his weakness, was a cutting recollection; till then he had stood high in the good opinion of that excellent

young lady; every hour that he passed in Manstock-house, whilst she was present, made this more and more manifest; even his natural humility of character could not overlook it; he saw the advances he made in her good graces, and only trembled for her danger lest they were too rapid; every look, every action that that was directed towards him had an expression not to be mistaken; Susan's reports confirmed the interest that he had established in the approving heart of her lovely mistress, and the satisfaction which she took in her evening walks with him, with the innocent contrivances she had to prolong and to repeat them, were flattering indications of an attachment forming fast, if not already formed; the greater therefore was his fall from hopes so elevated; and what could he now expect from purity like her's, but absolute dismission and contempt?
As for the measures he was now to take towards his new discovered mother, they seemed to offer nothing to his view but a maze of difficulties. To lay open to her his embarassments, and make a full confession of his faults and misfortunes, was a task his resolution was not equal to, neither did it seem a fit subject

to discourse with her upon in her present state of health and spirits. But how to keep it from her was the question; how to stop so many channels through which the disgraceful story might find its way to her, was a point not easily to be determined; how far Miss Manstock might have spread her discovery was matter of uncertainty; her delicacy would hardly be brought to continue the same intimacy with Fanny Claypole as before, and every thing was to be dreaded from that young lady's flippant stile of talking, who would naturally make public the engagement she had entered into with him as an apology essential to her own defence; these, and many other apprehensions, that pressed upon his thoughts, were rendered doubly alarming, when he took into his consideration the character of Mr. Claypole; from him he had every thing to expect that a jealous, deep-projecting spirit could devise; he saw to what extent his influence over Sir Roger Manstock might be carried; and he had no cause to doubt him well disposed to put it to the stretch for any object that he had at heart: beset on all sides with such difficulties, and in a streight from which he spied no honourable

escape, it is not to be wondered at if his thoughts wavered without any fixt resolve, embarrassed and distressed.
One small alleviation Fortune granted him by the occupation of Ezekiel at this time with with his penitent at next door; he was not present to interpose and aggravate with fruitless declamations against the incontinence of Susan May, or the enormous crime of duelling, which Henry's affair with Captain Crowbery was sure to draw upon him; when behold the whole matter brought to issue at once by the arrival of Mr. Claypole himself now at the door of the cottage, and at this very moment in the act of dismounting from his palfrey.


CHAPTER III. Our Hero undergoes a second Examination by a certain Judge, with whom Conscience has no Concern.
THOUGH the reverend gentleman, who now visited our hero in his humble cottage, was left by us, when last we attended upon him, in the mind to defer this visit to the next

morning, yet second thoughts had made him change that resolve, upon the prudent recollection of the many interventions a procrastinated measure is exposed to, especially when it hangs upon the single security of a verbal promise, extorted as it were by surprize, and not deliberately given upon judgment and inclination. He therefore thought it best to steal a march upon disappointment, and without communicating his intentions to his niece, making only a slight apology to Sir Roger, mounted his horse, and proceeded upon a round trot to the village of Crowbery, pondering by the way upon the measures he was to take, and the language he was to hold, for securing the important purposes of his secret expedition.
There was an air of studied composure in his first approaches, with a degree of obsequious ceremony, that did not escape the penetrating observation of our hero Henry, who immediately assimilated his stile of address to that of his visitor, and kept himself on the reserve. After the usual salutations had passed and repassed between them, Claypole began to open his commission in the following manner:

"I wait upon you, Sir, on the behalf of

an orphan niece, for whose happiness and reputation I have all that tender interest, which, as a father, I cou'd entertain for an only child. Miss Claypole, give me leave to say, is a young lady, on whose character not the slightest imputation hitherto has been known to rest; judge therefore with what exquisite sensibility she feels the consequences of last night's event, and with what poignant inquietude she is now waiting the confirmation of that promise, which alone can heal those feelings, and relieve her anxious mind from its suspence: she is by nature endow'd with the warmest affections; those affections you have gain'd; your fine person, engaging attentions, and amiable character have made a conquest of her heart, and love, which in colder bosoms ripens by degrees, in her's sprung up at once to full maturity, and gave you unequivocal proofs how much you was beloved and trusted: I will not give the name of prudence to a passion of this cast; I must as a divine and moralist condemn excess in every shape; even our most virtuous propensities must have bounds set to their exertions; and errors, tho' arising from motives the most generous, merit some reproof; yet I will confess to you, that if in any instance I cou'd

find excuse for an unbounded confidence, it wou'd be in your's, relying, as I do, with so much justice, on your honour and integrity of principle; but, Sir, the virgin fame of an untainted character is delicate in the extreme; it is a blossom shrinking at the blast, withering and drooping with the touch. Those fond unguarded moments, which the sensualist calls golden opportunities, the man of honour shou'd account as sacred, and hold the heart, which love commits into his hands, as an inviolable trust. Now it has so happened, whether casually or providentially we will not enquire, that those very proofs of confidence and affection, which must have endeared her to you, have exposed her to reproach and shame, and obliged her to fly from the society she was in to my solitary parsonage, where she is now hiding herself in retirement and exclusion from all visitors but yourself, anxiously awaiting the completion of your promise to restore her to her reputation, her happiness, and friends. It is not therefore that I harbour any doubt of your good faith; it is not that I can suppose you lost to honour, or insensible to the beauty, fortune and good qualities of my niece, that I now require a confirmation of your word of

honour from your own lips, but simply that I may be authoriz'd not only to put her inquietude to rest, but also to assure Sir Roger Manstock, whose delicacy suffers great alarm by what has pass'd beneath his roof, that there is no call for his remonstrances, nor any insult meditated to a lady under his protection, and for whose redress he holds himself responsible."

Here Claypole ceased, and Henry replied as follows:—"A very few words, Sir, will suffice to answer all you have been pleas'd to say. I perfectly well remember what I have promis'd to Miss Claypole; and I want neither menaces nor persuasions to induce me to perform it."


"Give me leave then," cried Claypole, interposing, "to felicitate you on the possession of a lady, whom I have the vanity to say, the best gentleman in the kingdom might be proud to call his wife. I boast not of her fortune, Sir, that is but a secondary consideration where so many admirable qualities conspire to make the union happy; and fortune, perhaps, tho' with many the first object, may have lost much of its weight, if any it ever had, in your esteem, since this great accession has so luckily devolv'd upon you."



"Truly, Sir," said Henry in reply, "Miss Claypole's fortune never weigh'd with me; and as for this extraordinary bequest of Mr. Blachford's, which was totally unthought of, 'tis evident from the recency of the event, that it cou'd never be in contemplation of that lady at the moment of our engagement. It was, as you observe, a lucky cast of chance, and therefore, I conceive, whether I may or may not be benefited by it, it does not regularly come into question between you and me."


"Not as a principal, perhaps, but collaterally it does; it gives you means which you was unprovided with before, and therefore, as a friend soon to be connected with you in a near degree, you cannot wonder if I feel a lively interest in an event so calculated to promote your happiness."


"Right, Sir," resumed Henry;" it will promote my happiness, as all things must that please me on reflection, and enable me to say within myself, I have fulfilled the golden rule of doing as I wou'd be done by."


"That is indeed," said Claypole, gravely, "the great rule of Christian equity; but I must own I do not at this time exactly see your application of it, for I shou'd suppose

the point of conscience rather lies with Blachford than with you."


"I rather think it lies with both; an act of conscience which we share between us."


"I comprehend you now less than I did before," quoth the baffled interrogator; "will you be pleas'd to explain to me?"


"In one single word; Mr. Blachford has a son."

Claypole started, threw himself back in his chair, and striking his hands together, after the fashion of his patron Sir Roger, exclaimed—"Well, Sir, a son! what then? some bastard we'll suppose."


"And if we do suppose it such, what then?" said Henry, retorting his words rather acrimoniously, and pretty nearly in the same key and cadence.
Claypole paused; he recollected probably the point his question bore ad hominem, and cooly answered, that the law did not acknowledge persons of that description.

"But you and I are neither of us lawyers," replied our hero, softening his manner: "You are a divine, a moralist profest, and as for me, poor altho' I am, and probably in the very same predicament with this son of nature, yet

I wou'd fain aspire to copy that great rule of Christian equity approv'd by you, and shew that I am not wanting in a sense of honour towards others, no less than towards Miss Claypole."


"Still I am puzzled," rejoined Claypole, "to comprehend your meaning: you tell me Blachford has a son. You have not told me that he means to leave him his estate."


"Permit me first to ask what you wou'd counsel him to do, had you his conscience in your care."


"That is a question for myself, not him: I understood that you was made his heir by will."


"And so I am," said Henry; "but my will must be consenting to the execution of the deed."


"And what shou'd hinder it? 'Tis an atonement for a murderous attempt: he bestows upon you his fortune; he sought to take away your life."


"He gave life to this innocent."


"Some beggar's brat, perhaps: Blachford was very low in his amours: a small provision may suffice for such an one."


"But I," said Henry, "am no son of

Blachford's; I covet not his gold: I can forgive my enemy without a bribe, but I cannot strip the child of its inheritance to purchase the world's wealth; I cannot do it; and I think you do not wish to see me rich on such conditions."

To this the reverend visitor replied, "I shou'd have thought, young gentleman, that you had felt the smart of poverty sufficiently to warn you from encountering it afresh: an unconnected being in the world may be romantic at his own expence, but you are not this being; you have claims upon you nearer, I shou'd suppose, and dearer to you, than this brat of Blachford, which possibly some hussey fathers on him falsely; and I am unwilling to believe you seriously intend to throw good fortune from you, when you so happily might share it with a well-beloved wife."


"Had that lady ever had a share in it," replied Henry, "or had that fortune ever been but hinted at as a contingency within the scope of speculation, I shou'd have something to account for; but you must be conscious how very recently this thing has dropt upon me; and that it is an unlookt for opportunity of being just at my own cost; no other person

has a part in what I sacrifice; and what is that man's honesty, which does not reach beyond his interest? If we do well, and suffer for it, that service is acceptable. This being a christian principle, I cannot doubt but it is your's."

At these words the reverend personage assumed a look of more than ordinary gravity, in which 'tis possible some mixture of wrath might be discernible, and thus made answer—"It is not now a question what my principles may be, but what your's are, and I suspect that, under a romantic idea of justice to others, you forget the justice due to yourself and those connected with you. If you can lavish Blachford's whole estate away at a stroke, what security have I that you wou'd not serve Miss Claypole's in the like manner, was it in your power? Such principles as these are dangerous to the peace and prosperity of families, and you cannot wonder if, in point of prudence, I am somewhat stagger'd: he that enriches beggars may make rich folks poor. What will my Lady Crowbery say to this proceeding?"


"I have not ask'd her."


"But it will much import you so to do. This fortune wou'd have made you independent:

you have now nothing to look to but her favour; and how is it certain, when this business shall be known, she may not think fit to withdraw it? 'Tis right at least that her intentions shou'd be understood before we venture further. You have also been engag'd in a duel with a relation of Lord Crowbery's. These are altogether such proceedings as may cause a change of sentiment in your patroness; and what then becomes of my poor niece? I must be certified from that noble personage herself in what light she regards this most extraordinary measure."

To this Henry replied—"If you act solely for yourself in this affair, Mr. Claypole, you will act solely from your own judgment; if for your niece, you will probably consult her wishes before you take a step so totally subversive of the whole transaction, as your reference to Lady Crowbery wou'd be."


"I don't understand you, Sir; did you propose to marry without her consent?"


"I certainly had not pledg'd her consent in my promise, and did not therefore engage more than myself to the performance of it. If Miss Claypole accepts that promise, my

honour is attach'd to it, and I hold it sacred: if it is referr'd to Lady Crowbery, my responsibility is taken off, and I shall act by her decision. I hold it as a point of honour to Miss Claypole, thus to state it to you; the alternative is before you."

Mr. Claypole paused for reflection, and then demanded, "How wou'd you advise us to proceed, when it appears that you have nothing to depend upon but the eventual bounty and protection of the Lady Crowbery? But there is yet another thing," added he, "to be explain'd: you inform'd my friend Sir Roger Manstock by a letter which I saw, that you was going out to sea with Captain Cary; I trust you have no thoughts of that."


"Pardon me, Sir; such is my full intention."


"Is that consistent," cried Claypole, "with your promise to my niece?"


"Perfectly so; she will have no cause to complain of it."


"But will Sir Roger Manstock, think you, not oppose his nephew's taking you on board his ship, under such circumstances?"


"I shou'd much fear he will," replied

Henry, "if you exert your influence to dispose him so to do; in that case I must take some other means."


"Then you are resolv'd at all events to go."


"I am."


"And what to do, permit me to inquire?"


"I hope," said Henry, "you will not press me on that question, seeing we do not treat entirely upon confidence; had we so done, I shou'd hold nothing back. The affair is now entirely with Miss Claypole; in her hands I deposit my honour and my destiny; if she accepts them unconditionally as they, were pledg'd, she has then a right to be inform'd of my intentions; if not, the secret dwells with me."

Claypole foresaw that here the conference must end. "That secret," he replied, "may easily be guess'd at."—Then added in conclusion—"I shall make true report of what you tell me to my niece."




CHAPTER IV. The Decree of the Judge without Conscience is reversed.
MR. Claypole had risen from his seat, and was upon the point of departing, when Ezekiel bolted into the room with unaccustomed alacrity, and running up to our young hero, threw his arms about his neck: curiosity, or some deeper motive, fixed the reverend visitor to the spot, and the animated enthusiast, who probably did not know there was a third person present, proceeded to cry out in an ecstatic tone—"Henry! my son! my child! my glorious generous boy! may Heaven shower down its blessings on your head! Come to my heart, for it runs over with affection for you. No, no, I cannot part from you; I never will; I will work for you, pray for you, nay, by the Lord, I will fight for you."—Having, whilst he uttered these last words, quitted his embrace, to put himself in a martial attitude, correspondent with the sentiment, he cast his eyes upon the person of the looker-on—"Under

favour, reverend Sir," he said, "I protest I did not advert to your person being present: Mr. Claypole, or I am mistaken."


"The same," cried Claypole, "at your service."


"Not so, worthy Sir," rejoined Ezekiel, "you serve no human master; and I hail the happy chance that brings you hither to partake of that delight, that christian joy and exultation, which your heart must feel, as preacher of the word of truth and charity, to see this youth, a stripling in the race that is set before us, outstep all competitors, and seize the glorious goal of victory over Mammon, and all his sordid, lucre-loving, filthy worshippers, at an age green in experience, grey, thank Heaven, in virtue, charity and every christian grace! Yes, reverend Sir, you must surely rejoice and be glad, inasmuch as our friend Henry now appertaineth to your flock; and report speaks loudly of you as of a faithful pastor in Christ, and I your poor fellow servant and follower at due distance, venerate you therefore. How then must your pious bosom glow to see that this our friend has sacrific'd a noble fortune to his love of justice, rejected treasures pour'd into his lap; treasures

that might have tempted hermits from their cells, to save the sinner's soul, and clear his conscience for the great account. 'There is that maketh himself rich, yet hath nothing; there is that maketh himself poor, yet hath great riches,' faith the wise man. Behold! this good deed hath our young man done; and verily, he shall have great riches in the true sense of the proverb: he hath not taken away the inheritance of the poor destitute; he hath not robb'd the children's children of their bread, therefore he shall have an inheritance amongst the children of light. I have this instant left the couch of the dying man; I pronounce him a true penitent; the thorns, that lurk'd within his pillow, thy hand, my Henry, hath drawn; his death will be easy; his spirit will expire in blessings; his child is now his heir; the will is clos'd, and he longs to clasp him in his arms: the poor deluded wench, whom his base arts seduc'd, the widow's only child, will now be comforted, and when I've set before her eyes the loathsomeness of sin in proper colours, I have good hope she'll tread the paths of purity hereafter; at least she shall not want for exhortations on my part; the daughter of our friendly widow May shall

not be lost for lack of spiritual assistance and advice."


"How's this?" exclaimed Claypole, turning himself towards Henry; "Is Susan May the mother of a son by Blachford? and has the daughter of my friend Sir Roger Manstock been harbouring a strumpet in her service?"


"A strumpet do you call her?" cried Ezekiel. "Reverend Sir, I pray you be advis'd more truly; I do pronounce Susan May to be no strumpet, albeit the mother of this babe; for virtue undermin'd by artifice, or violated by force, is virtue not the less, and charity will give it its true name, with pity and compassion super-added. Your Master, reverend Sir, and mine, condemn'd not her that was taken even in adultery itself; shall we, forgetting his divine benevolence, condemn this damsel, sacrific'd by treachery, divested of reason by the operation of seducing and intoxicating potions, and then thrown insensible and unresisting on the impure couch of the defiler? Forbid it, charity! that you, or I, or any one of christian training, shou'd call that guiltless sufferer a strumpet."

Claypole had heard enough; confounded, vext, indignant; he now started from his seat,

and snatching up his hat, whispered a few words to Henry; and then darting an angry look at honest Daw, hastily departed.


CHAPTER V. Our Hero is admitted to an unexpected Conference.
WHILST this was passing in the cottage, Captain Crowbery, after his rencontre with Henry, had returned to the castle, and in a conversation with his cousin the Viscount had done justice to the spirited behaviour of his antagonist, relating the grounds of their quarrel, the words that had passed at their meeting, and all the particulars consequential of it. Now it so happened, that the peer was conscious of being as deep in the plot of the press-gang as his kinsman, but he was not conscious of the same courage to face the resentment of our hero: the story, therefore, caused certain perturbations in his Lordship's mind not altogether agreeable, and he became extremely anxious to be assured that

the affair was made up so completely, that no after-reckonings could be started, which he himself might be called upon to account for. Nothing humbles some people's pride so much as fear; the pride of Lord Crowbery hardly stooped to any other corrector. On the present occasion, it was thoroughly brought down by more fears than one, for the Captain had brought the news of Henry's being heir to Blachford, which not only cut up his Lordship's interested expectations from that quarter, but brought to his recollection certain papers and correspondences in the possession of the said testator, which would naturally fall into the hands of his executor, and disclose matters very inconvenient to his Lordship to have revealed. How to get these out of Henry's reach was now the question; he had called frequently at the sick man's door for that purpose, but had never been admitted; and to these documents, if they were yet in existence, not only his reputation, but what was dearer to him still, his personal safety, was committed.
It was now that he regretted his former haughty treatment of our hero; he felt himself the dupe of Blachford, and perceived that he had practised upon his jealousy with no

other view but to serve his own revengeful purposes, and engage him as a party in his plots against an innocent man. Nay, it is to be presumed, he was not quite proof against the many instances of Henry's honourable conduct; and the impression Captain Crowbery had now received of our hero's behaviour was such, as had made a total change in his sentiments, and that gentleman was now become as zealous an advocate and admirer, as before he was an enemy and a persecutor of Henry. Lord Crowbery, who had motives not quite so honourable, but not less cogent, for making his peace with our hero, lent a willing ear to the commendations that his cousin bestowed upon him, and declared himself so fully convinced that he had been betrayed by Blachford into groundless jealousies and suspicions, that he proposed inviting him to his house, and indulging him with a visit to his benefactress upon the eve of her departure, as a token of his entire reconciliation, and to do away, by this mark of his confidence, all those reports that had been circulated against the reputation of his Lady.
This proposal being heartily seconded by the Captain, Lord Crowbery immediately repaired

to the chamber of his Lady, and approaching her with a mild and gracious look, he began by assuring her that he had entirely and for ever dismissed every relic of unkindness and suspicion from his mind; that he was sensible he had been led into error, and alarmed without reason as to her partiality for Henry; that he saw it now not only in the most innocent but most amiable light, and he wished her to persist in the protection of one so well deserving. Lest she should doubt the sincerity of his conversion to an opinion so directly opposite to what he had lately held, he repeated, in short, the substance of the conversation he had just had with his kinsman, and concluded by saying, that as he was persuaded she must wish to see Henry, and to take leave of him before her departure, he proposed, with her consent, to send for him to his house, where she herself should be a witness of the reception he would give him.
Lady Crowbery heard this proposal with a sensation of pleasure not entirely clear from suspicion of its sincerity, yet as she could readily comprehend some reasons that her Lord might have for altering his tone at least, if not his temper, she was not backward to embrace

it with as good a grace as she was capable of assuming. Few favours could be less expected than that of her being permitted to visit Manstock house; this was an indulgence far beyond all hope or conjecture, yet, as she owed the first to the influence of Mr. L—, she might also be indebted to him, jointly with Captain Crowbery, for this further instance of a revolution, either real or affected, in the conduct and opinions of her Lord: and now the Captain with much alacrity undertook to be the bearer of a very civil invitation to our hero on the part of the Viscount, requesting him forthwith to repair to the Castle, where Lady Crowbery was expecting his arrival.
He obeyed the summons, and being prepared for a kind reception by the Captain, who accompanied him from the cottage, he was ushered without delay to the chamber of his mother, where my Lord was waiting, and with as much address as he was master of, welcomed him to his house, saying, that he hoped all former misunderstandings would be forgotten, and that they might be good friends and neighbours in all future time. To this Henry made a proper reply in the same stile of civility, and approached towards Lady

Crowbery, to pay her his respects silently and cautiously, with a tender look of pity and attention. Her languid but still lovely countenance cut him to the heart; the change her frame and features had undergone since last he saw her was too visible. Turning from a spectacle so affecting, he said,—"It is very kind in you, my Lord, to allow me to pay this melancholy duty to my benefactress; 'tis generous to have this consideration for one, who, with all the purest sentiments of gratitude to the only friend he has in life, is now at length permitted to approach her: I humbly thank you for this great indulgence."

His voice could execute no more—not a word was attempted by the mother.—"I'll leave you to yourselves," said Lord Crowbery, "and give orders that you shall not be disturbed; your time and privacy shall be your own."

The door was shut; his step was heard upon the stairs; nature was freed from all restraint; Henry dropt on his knee, and bathed his mother's hand with tears.—"My son, my son!" was all that she could utter. To attempt the recapitulation of this tender dialogue would be in vain, for words can ill describe

a scene like this; and he must be an actor rather than author, that can give life to representatives of son and mother in such touching situations. The matter, not the manner, lies within my powers. Henry imparted to her his plan of meeting her at Lisbon, by the favour of Captain Cary, now upon the point of sailing.—"Did she approve of his so doing?"—She most highly approved of it, and warmly recommended it, for reasons interesting to him, no less than to herself: she had received a verbal intimation, through a confidential channel, from his father, Mr. Delapoer, avowing himself the person who had sent her the ring as a token of his affectionate remembrance of her, and faithful adherence to his first vows, through many years of absence, and a long course of various adventures; that he still considered himself as her husband in heart; and hearing with the deepest concern that her case was such as made it necessary for her to resort to Lisbon, he had determined to hasten thither himself, in the hope that he might be permitted there to devote his honourable attentions to her service, and approve himself still gratefully impressed with that pure but ardent attachment, which no

absence had been able to abate, and which to the last hour of life he should unalterably retain.
This intelligence was in all respects most satisfactory to Henry, who had now a certainty of his father being living, and a fair prospect of retrieving his late disappointment, by a speedy meeting. We shall not be minute in detailing all that was said by the respective parties upon this interesting topic, nor shall we be more particular in stating what passed between them on the subject of Blachford's will; it may suffice to say, that Henry's disinterested renunciation of the bequest, in favour of a natural heir, met with full approbation and applause from his generous mother, who concluded her remarks upon the transaction, by declaring, that from the first moment she had heard of it, she had never cordially reconciled herself to the circumstance of her son's being made heir to a fortune so amassed and so devised, which not only robbed him of the credit of forgiving a repentant enemy, freely and unconditionally, but which would probably involve him in trouble and perplexity, and set him forth to the world under a suspicion of foul dealing, which she could

not bear to have his character exposed to, and be made a topic for detraction, for the mere worldly advantages of stepping into a man's fortune, who bore no other relation or alliance to him, than as one, who having been his enemy and intentional assassin, had by a death-bed repentance been converted to a friend and unexpected benefactor. It was therefore with the most heartfelt satisfaction she saw him endowed with spirit to judge and act so consonantly to her feelings, without any advice on her part, or any knowledge on his of the extent of her intentions towards him, which, she would now inform him, were no less than to bequeath him the whole and entire estate of her father, which by will she was invested with; a property so ample, that the superfluous bequest of Mr. Blachford was no longer worth a thought.
This led her to speak of Sir Roger, in whose hands she had lodged her will; and after enquiring of her son how he had passed his time at Manstock House, with a view to discover what the state of his heart was towards the fair Isabella, turning to him with a look of maternal affection, she said—"Ah! my beloved Henry, wou'd you know the first and

warmest wish of your fond mother's heart, it is that you may gain an interest with that lovely girl, so form'd to make you happy: I know her to be so devoted to her father, as to have profest certain resolutions, which I hold to be romantic; and I can well believe it must be a lover of no common qualities, that can induce her to forego them; but as you cannot in your present unacknowledg'd character hope to engage the consent of my uncle, nor honourably make known your real pretensions to Isabella herself, I have that perfect trust in her honour, that I am ready to confide to her alone the secret of your being my son, if you can give me hope there is that disposition in her, which, upon this discovery, might be improv'd to your advantage: tell me therefore with sincerity how you stand in her good graces, and to-morrow, when she and I are alone at Manstock, I will be your advocate, and throw myself upon her candour for your sake."


"Heaven bless you for your goodness!" cried Henry; "how can I ever thank you as I ought? What can I say or do, or undertake for your sake, that may but in the least degree demonstrate to you my gratitude for all your

bounties? Let me attempt some act of duty, which no son has ever yet aspir'd to! let me forbear to think of love and Isabella, whilst your life, so dear to me above all earthly blessings, hangs in this dangerous suspence. I will not suffer any other thought to lodge within my heart: Oh! my beloved honour'd mother, let me devote myself to you alone."

Here he again cast himself at her feet, whilst she threw her arms about his neck and pressed him to her bosom;—"My son! my soul!" she cried, "this transport of affection is a cordial to your sick mother, that gives her a new life: your love revives me, my dear child, and seems to animate my languid frame with health and strength. Is it not fit that I should live for him that gives me life? And now, my son, without more questioning, I have found you out; your heart is in my sight; I see the lovely Isabella has possession of it. How shou'd it be otherwise? How should such beauty, modesty, good sense, and sweetness fail to gain the affections of a soul congenial to her own? You love her, Henry, and as it is not in your nature to prevaricate, it is not in your nature to deny it."

At this moment Zachary Cawdle entered

the apartment, bearing in his hand a phial, which, although its contents were of a restorative quality, we doubt if his patient was not more annoyed by his interruption, than profited by his cordial.


CHAPTER VI. The Conference is interrupted, resumed, and concluded.
THOUGH Zachary was informed that Henry was with his patient, and knew, without being informed, that the minutes of their privacy were extremely precious, yet as he was fixt in the opinion that all things ought to give way to medicine and method, he did not permit any scruples to stop him, as soon as ever the clock gave notice that the four hours draught was in turn to be repeated. In this instance however, the feelings of the son did not entirely correspond with those of the mother, and the interruption that gave pain to her, was to him a sensible relief, for in this interval of time he had so far recollected himself, as to be prepared against the dilemma,

to which he was now driven with respect to Isabella. The first caution, that occurred to his thoughts, was to divert Lady Crowbery from her proposal of divulging the secret of his birth to Miss Manstock, or taking any measures with that young lady for interesting her in his favour, esteeming it unfair that any attempt should be made on her affections on his behalf, circumstanced as he was with respect to Fanny Claypole: the next thing that struck him, was the propriety of holding back from his mother the vexatious embarrassment he was involved in with the lady last mentioned, at least till the result of her uncle's report, and her resolutions thereupon, were made known to him. From the language lately held by Mr. Claypole he still nourished a faint hope that it was possible he might be set loose from his unfortunate engagement, an emancipation that he would have thought cheaply purchased by the sacrifice of Blachford's legacy; and in this interim, why was he to be the first to publish an affair not over delicate in the recital, and certainly not very reputable to the lady in question? If he was dismissed, the least he could do was to keep his own secret; if not, it became his interest

to uphold her reputation by all the means in his power: he therefore prudently determined not to open himself on this painful and afflicting subject.
No sooner had the punctual man of medicine left them at liberty to resume their conversation, than Henry, taking up the subject where Lady Crowbery had left it, addressed himself to her as follows:—"I shou'd be asham'd of prevarication in your presence, more especially as you declare that my heart is in your sight, which that it may deserve to be, both now and for ever, it behoves me to keep it clear from dissimulation and hypocrisy: I am flatter'd therefore, when you say that you discern in it affection and esteem for the loveliest and most amiable of her sex, as I must own you wou'd have reason to turn away your eyes with loathing and aversion had you found it unempassion'd by her charms or insensible to her perfections. Blest indeed must be the man who cou'd boast of the possession of a heart like her's, and whose pretensions might be sanction'd by her father's free consent; but as I hold myself excluded from all chance of such a blessing, and am persuaded that my destiny is otherwise directed,

I do most earnestly implore my kind and generous mother, not only not to let the secret of my birth, and the too liberal disposition of her fortune, pass her lips, but also to refrain from moving the soft heart of Isabella in my favour: let that sweet nature be at peace, nor stir her any farther to a thought of me, than as of one who knows himself unworthy her regards, and hopelessly admires and honours her. If I had ever any place in her affections, let it wear out by absence; let me, like her, devote myself to filial duty, and then, although our objects are alike, our destinations will be widely apart: Lisbon and Manstock House will make a chasm between us, over which I hope no sigh of her's will ever pass. That you believe me worthy such a blessing is an honour above all merit; that you would risque your secret, and engage yourself to plead for me to Isabella, is a mark of your benevolence, for which I am ever bound to you; but I most solemnly implore you for the present to withold it."


"Well, my dear Henry," the tender mother replied, "I'll not go counter to your wishes, but give you credit for the principle on which you act, though I confess you puzzle and surprize

me: reasons I must suppose you have, more than you think it needful to display; and as I have firm reliance on your rectitude of thought and conduct, I will not embarrass you with any questions on this point. Are we to meet at Manstock House?"


"With your permission, no: I look to join the ship to-morrow."


"I hope you have no farther differences to adjust with Captain Crowbery."


"None," replied Henry; "absolutely none, upon my honour; I am in perfect reconciliation with that gentleman, and hold myself for ever bound to testify to his most honourable and manly behaviour in an affair, where I was much too warm."


"Have you any thing in commission for me to say to my uncle?"


"Nothing, but my most grateful thanks for all his goodness."


"And what to Isabella?"


"Oh! my dear Madam," exclaimed Henry, "why that question? Let me conceive in silence, but not vent those wishes even in a whisper: ask me not what to Isabella; my whole soul is her's, yet wou'd my tongue be the veriest traitor to the cause of honour and

humanity, were it to tell her how I doat upon her. By the love you bear me, I conjure you do not let her know the insolent confession, which your sudden question has drawn from me: 'twill ruin me for ever in her thoughts, if she shou'd hear that I presume so much as but to name her, though it were in my prayers."


"What is this you tell me?" she cried. "Now, Henry, now I own you rouse my curiosity to know what thought so dreadful harbours in your heart. What have you done to ruin yourself with Isabella? Confess, for the alarm is terrible; surely, my son, surely your passion has not master'd your respect."


"Just Heaven renounce me, if in thought I could offend against such purity! No, Madam," he cried, "no, your son is not a savage; and if I were, her virtue wou'd restrain and awe the wildest and the worst of natures."


"What then," said she, "reduces you to hold this language? 'Tis not mere respect that dictates to you words like those you utter'd; the most humble supplicant, nay, Henry, the most abject self-convicted offender

wou'd not so address himself to any human being."


"What have I said?" resumed he: "Oh! that I could recal my words; but you will not release them. What can I say? Must I confess to you I have offended Isabella past redemption? Shock'd her chaste eyes, revolted her pure nature; not indeed in her own person; that were to sin as it were against Heaven; but in the person of another, far, far different, alas! from her. There let me stop; press me no farther I conjure you; let her divulge the rest; and if she does, defend me not, dear mother, but tell her I am conscience-smitten, self-condemn'd, and punish'd more than ever wretch was punish'd, in the loss of her esteem."


"If I did not persuade myself," she replied, "that you are incapable of any thing that's grossly wrong, I should be truly wretched; but as I am firm in that persuasion, and satisfied by your assurance that the offence does not personally affect my co
•…
 Isabella, I will not believe that you need 
〈…〉
 to despair of pardon: I guess it is some 
•…
dy boyish scrape, which you have fallen into, and I can also guess with whom, but lovers use strong

language when they speak of their quarrels, and I can allow a great deal for your extraordinary sensibility; a frown, a pout, a pettish word can make strange havoc with a heart feeling and fond as your's; but Isabella will forgive you; take my word for it, Henry, I shall find a soft moment to make your peace, and send you a full pardon, upon proper submission and atonement."

Henry had by this time collected his thoughts sufficiently to see the danger into which he had been surprized, and how far he had outstept discretion in this unguarded declaration of his passion; he was therefore eager to avail himself of the opening, which his mother's temperate answer gave him, for drawing back in time to save himself, without committing Fanny Claypole; and though it was pretty clear that Lady Crowbery's suspicion pointed at Susan May, yet as she was not directly named, and time would quickly serve for him to clear her character, he acquiesced in the deception, and was silent.
It was now time to put an end to their conference; but before this took place, he was fain to compound for a release from all further enquiries, by promising to remain where he

was during the whole of the next day, when he was to hold himself amenable to any summons that his mother, after her arrival at Manstock House, might think fit to send him. This compromise being acceded to on his part, and sealed with a maternal embrace on that of Lady Crowbery, they tenderly took leave of each other, and parted.


CHAPTER VII. The Penitent, on his Death-bed, atones to Justice.
WHEN Henry arrived at the cottage, he found the nurse with Susan May's child waiting his return: in a few minutes after, the chaise with the mother herself drove to the door. Ezekiel Daw was at this time in attendance upon his penitent. Henry put the nurse and child into the inner chamber, and no third person being present at his meeting with Susan, he proceeded without interruption to explain to her the purposes for which he had called her from Manstock House, and in speaking of her connection with Blachford,

treated her feelings with such delicacy (assuring her, that by the confession of her seducer she would stand acquitted to all that heard the story) that his consideration for her character, no less than the very extraordinary sacrifice he had made to her interest, so affected her, as to leave her no other powers of expressing her gratitude, except what her tears, which flowed in plenty, could supply.

"Wonder not," he cried, "at what I have done, as if it was a case uncommon for a man to be just and honest. What have I to do with Blachford and his money? If he had bequeath'd it to me, and died before I had made this discovery of the claim you have upon him, I shou'd have held myself obliged in conscience to make over what he left me to your son and you. New I do not wish to make a parade of my disinterestedness, and shou'd hold it rather as an affront to be complimented for an act of justice, regarding it as a hint, that they suspected me to be a knave; I therefore think myself very happy to have found your secret out in time, to make that an act of atonement on his part, which, had it devolv'd upon me, wou'd have put me to the trouble of a conveyance, and annoy'd me very probably

with a great deal of that popularity and applause, which some people are flatter'd with, but which I have no taste for."

When Henry, by this and other representations like this, perceived that he had in some degree quieted the agitation of Susan's spirits, he put her in mind to make ready for an interview with the father of her child, and having stept into the inner room, he presented to her sight the child itself, giving it into her arms, and declaring it to be his ward, and the infant heir of Blachford. The beauty of the child, the ecstacy of the mother, the astonishment of the nurse, and the benevolence depicted in the features of our blooming hero, composed a group of characters not totally unworthy the historic pencil of the painter of the passions.

The generous heart of Henry, in the contemplation of this scene, enjoyed a more luxurious banquet than the wealth of Blachford could have purchased. True gratitude, like deep-felt woe, is not to be discharged by words; Susan was mute, and once, if Henry had not stopt her, she was falling at his feet.—"What are you about to do? he cried. "Remember, you once tender'd me your all; I'm

only paying you with what is not my own."—And now bidding her take heart and follow him, he proceeded with her, the infant, and the nurse, to the sick man's house: they were admitted without delay; Blachford was impatiently expecting them, and Ezekiel Daw was in the chamber with him. Henry took the child in his arms, and advancing to the couch, presented it to its father—"I have brought," he cried, "two comforters to visit you; the one, in the person of this smiling cherub, seems the very emblem of peace; the other, (pointing to Susan as he spoke) by your justice reinstated in her innocence, and indemnified for her injuries, will heal those inward pains that agonize us more than all our fleshly wounds: accept them, cherish them, embrace them; they will brighten every moment of your life, and the last moment more than all; in this life, they will be the witnesses and recorders of your penitence, in the life to come your advocates and intercessors at the throne of mercy."—Blachford took the child in his arms, and listing up his eyes, exclaimed—"The Lord of mercy grant their intercessions may avail!"—"Amen!" echoed the pious Ezekiel, from a corner of the room, to which

he had retreated, and where, dropping on his knees, he silently put up a fervent and (let us hope) not ineffectual prayer.
Blachford, whose mind was now prepared for death, and felt the awful coming on, was instant in his wishes to complete the last remaining task he had to do on earth, whilst yet his senses were entire. The lawyer was in waiting, and Zachary, with his sub-surgeon Kinloch, coming in most opportunely at the instant, all things seemed to favour the important work, and nothing now was wanting but the concluding forms to make it perfect. Blachford was raised upon his couch to sign and seal; the materials were set before him, the witnesses stood round him, when turning his eyes on Zachary first, and next on Kinloch, he said,—"I call upon you, gentlemen, to attest upon the faith of honest men, and able judges of my situation, that I am now in mental faculties sound and competent to execute this deed, declaring it my will and testament, by which I make this infant, born of Susan May here present, and my son, of her begotten out of wedlock, sole heir of all my property, save what is herein given and bequeathed to her, the mother, by annuity charged

on the estate; also one small acknowledgment of five hundred pounds to this my executor, and guardian of my son, Henry Fitzhenry, so called, at whose solicitation, voluntarily and generously made, I have revoked the former disposition of my affairs in his behalf. A most disinterested and conscientious act it was, and I do pray him to accept this small bequest in token of my love and his forgiveness, conscious as I am of his unequalled worth, and deeply penitent for all that I have said, or done, or meditated in his wrong: and further, I enjoin and strictly charge the mother of my child to be observant of his counsel and advice, and firmly to impress upon the mind of this her infant, as he grows to years of reason and reflection, what he owes to this his benefactor, by whose special bounty he is now endow'd with affluence, that else it never cou'd have been his fortune to enjoy."

Having said this, and the appeal he had made to Zachary and his attendant being answered with assurances of their entire conviction of his being in perfect possession of his senses (a point indeed which no one of his hearers could be deceived in) he signed and sealed his will, and, after it was witnessed, delivered

it to Henry. Exhausted by these efforts, he began so evidently to droop, that Doctor Cawdle, in virtue of his medical authority, dismissed the whole company. The mother, child and nurse were by Blachford's desire accommodated with beds in his house; Henry contented himself with his quarters at the cottage; but having hitherto abstained from asking any questions about a matter that was nearest to his heart, and the business to which he had devoted his first attention being so happily concluded, he became impatient for a few minutes in private with his friend Susan. Of this wished-for opportunity he was soon put in possession; for Ezekiel, on whose mind these events had made a powerful impression, had walked home in deep meditation, without saying a word to any body; whereupon Susan, having given her boy in charge to the nurse, retired with Henry into Blachford's parlour. It was the very room where the one party had been arraigned for his life, and the other despoiled of her innocence. What mighty revolutions can a few short days effect! the offender at the point of death, the sufferers restored to their character, and the property of the guilty, including the very scene

of his criminality, actually made over as an atonement to the guiltless.
Henry, to prevent interruption, made fast the door, and taking Susan by the hand, led her to a chair: she was still trembling with agitation; tremors of another sort would have possessed her, had Henry so done a while ago: she now looked up to him with aweful admiration; love, tempered with respect, gave that chaste expression to her eyes, which on some past occasions had exhibited affections not so pure: passions as irresistible as that which now had command of her more than once had impelled her to embrace him wantonly in her arms; pure gratitude, unmixed with any grosser impulse, now threw her, bathed in tears, upon his neck: he pressed her tenderly to his bosom, spoke of the kindnesses she had so often shewn him, and asserted obligations received on his part, prior and superior to these conferred on her; when, having soothed her in this generous manner for some minutes—"Now tell me, I conjure you," he cried, "and tell me truly, am I totally undone in the opinion of your lovely mistress?"—"Alas!" she replied, "what can I tell you, my dear friend and benefactor? certain it is,

that gentle heart is wounded through and through; but whether more by displeasure than by sorrow I am yet to learn. She is very silent on the subject, and it is not from her lips that the story has escap'd; it is Miss Claypole herself and her politic uncle (pardon me, if I cannot speak of them with the respect that becomes me) who have made public what my young lady's delicacy never would have spoken of, and what their's, one should have thought, would have been interested to conceal. But when Miss thought fit to blazon her own shame, by bouncing out of the house, and betaking herself to the parsonage, as if she had been flying from her persecutors, the whole family were up in arms, as I may say, and every mouth was open'd to cry shame upon her. 'Tis not to be told with what a confidence she has carried it off, venting herself against my meek young lady in a manner that I am sure you wou'd detest her for. Ah! my beloved friend, where were your eyes, your heart, your understanding, during that fatal gallery-adventure? I can no otherwise account for it, than by supposing you was not in your senses at the moment; knowing how temperate you are, and unaccustom'd to excess,

I must impute it to the effects of the wine you drank upon the election meeting, and so I told my Lady."—"You told her true," said Henry; "but what then? One bestiality cannot excuse another."


"Pardon me," rejoined Susan, "her candour found a motive for excusing it; but no candour can justify the sacrifice you are making of your happiness, if the report be true, which that young madam circulates, that you are pledg'd to her for marriage. Heaven forbid that I shou'd see that day! Surely, surely you have not madly made that promise; why, 'tis ruin, misery, disgrace inevitable! Stop me, if I proceed too far; I shou'd be sorry to offend you; but indeed, my dear Sir, every body knows, and every body says, without scruple, what Miss Claypole is."


"What is she? I am not offended—speak."


"What is she! A coquette, a flirt, a wanton: one that will go great lengths, if not all; but that perhaps you can best tell: be that however as it may, you are not the only favour'd lover; others, and not a few, have been as kindly treated as yourself: her uncle knows that well enough, and is indeed a generous man to part with what he's tir'd of, and

knows to be a property that hangs upon his hands, and keeps him in alarm for every day that passes till he is rid of her. Believe me, my dear Sir, that uncle is a deep one; not a servant in the family but laments the influence he has over their good master; and though Miss Manstock is too delicate to speak out, I can discover to a certainty that she is not mistaken in his character; no, nor my Lady Crowbery neither, though it is given out in the house that he is to succeed to your Mr. Ratcliffe's living."


"Indeed!" cried Henry, "is that said? 'Tis time for me to counteract him in those hopes. Claypole succeed my friend! my honour'd friend! Impossible! that shall never take place."—Observing Susan look at him with surprize, he recollected himself, and in an humble tone added,—"At least if I have any interest with the lady patroness."—Susan resumed her discourse—"And now," said she, "Miss Claypole gives it out that she was frighted by the thunder-storm, and fainted in your arms: if it were so, what then? I hope you are not bound to marry the first lady that faints in your arms: but who believes that she was frighted? Nobody; she is not of the sort

to be so easily frighted; you must have known, if you had been yourself, that it was all put on to win you to her ways. The servants all declare that she was fit to eat you up, as they describe it; every one saw that, and knew what she was driving at: she dogg'd you to the gallery, and there the lucky storm help'd forward her determin'd scheme to take you in the very cue for mischief, heated with wine, half tipsey, and less than half yourself. Oh, Henry, Henry! (suffer me this once to address you thus familiarly) can I not speak in proof of your forbearance; of your self-command? Have I not a right to say, though saying it, I ought to blush at the recollection, that I have found you master of yourself, when I have lost all government of reason in the excess of my love to you? How often and how impetuously has passion hurried me into your arms, although no lucky storm was there commodiously to favour my fond wishes? yet you have withstood all trials; but perhaps nature has given her charms and powers to tempt, which I am not possess'd of; but this is true, as truth itself can witness, that no concessions on my part, no promise on your's, shou'd have prevail'd with me, even when

your fortune was at the lowest ebb, to have trepan'd you into marriage, conscious as I was that I had not that maiden purity to give, which you had so much right to expect. You know, full well you know, dearest and best of friends, there was a time, when in our sports and frolics by the way, as we return'd from making our purchases, that when you glanc'd at marriage, I drew back at once, and oftentimes I've been upon the point of telling you this tale of my seduction, had you not always seis'd those dangerous moments to cut short our conversation, and preserve my virtue and your own: and now, what mighty obligation can you have to this seducing wanton, though we'll suppose you have gone beyond that limit where discretion shou'd have stop'd? Grant that you have; whose virtue suffer'd most by the surprise? your's or the lady's? Because she throws away her reputation, must you marry her?"


"Before I answer to that question," replied Henry, "let me clear up one error. If Miss Claypole was inviolate before our meeting in that odious gallery, I promise you she left it as she enter'd it for me: her favours did not go the length you hint at. The vision of an


〈1 page duplicate〉



〈1 page duplicate〉


angel scar'd me from her embrace; the frown of purity itself subdued my guilty passions, and I fled from her allurements: but as I hold it due from every man of honour to make atonement for even the slightest stain he casts upon the fame of a woman of character, I tender'd her the only reparation in my power; my hand, if that cou'd heal the injury. She took my hand, alas! and broke my heart."


"Thank Heaven!" cried Susan, "you have taken one weight from my mind; the main point was not carried; she has felt one disappointment, and I'll engage it was a cutting one. Now I can understand the reason for her shifting to the vicarage; 'tis all a trap to catch you, and make sure of you; she thinks your honour then wou'd seal the bargain, and surrender you for life the dupe of her contrivances; but go not near her, I conjure you; let not that uncle, who is her setter, draw you in to visit her alone; you are ruin'd if you do. As for a word dropt in an unguarded moment, when you was not in clear possession of your reason, that I persuade myself you will not think yourself oblig'd to abide by, nor sacrifice the happiness of your whole life for a romantic punctilio."


Henry shook his head: she proceeded—"Now I begin to have more than a dawn of hope. Oh! let me once come to the ear of my dear young lady, and I'll pledge myself that all will be set straight. She loves you at her heart; I know she does; nay, she has own'd it to me in so many words. Vext as she was, and mortified to the very soul at your proceeding, still, when she surpris'd me reading your kind note on the morning of your leaving us, and saw the generous gift that it inclos'd, understanding it was a farewel token to my mother before you left us and went out to sea, the colour fled her cheeks, her eyes quiver'd in their lids, and she dropt, sweet afflicted soul, like a blossom from the stalk, lifeless into my arms. If this is not the very test of love, what is it? Ah! my dear, dear friend, do but once shake off this flirting damsel, and Miss Manstock is your own."


"And what can be so cutting as that thought?" said Henry. "What can afflict me deeper than to reflect I had a chance of happiness, and threw it wantonly away?"


"Who says that it is thrown away," replied Susan? "I have conviction to the contrary."—(Here she drew a letter from her pocket.)

"Does this appear like anger?" she demanded.—"Here is a note penn'd with her own fair hand; it is entrusted to me on this condition, only to be deliver'd to you, if you are disengag'd from Fanny Claypole."—"Stop then," cried Henry; "on these terms I must not take it, bless'd as I shou'd be."—"What am I to infer from this?" said she.—"That I will not permit you to break through conditions, which Miss Manstock has impos'd."—"But what if I am privy to the contents?"—"Let them be sacred," he rejoined; "breathe not a syllable, however delightful to my ears: I am not disengag'd from Miss Claypole, and therefore must not violate the seal, nor secretly purloin the purport of that letter, entrusted to you under those restrictions: remember, Susan, the same principle, which led me to decline the bequest of Mr. Blachford, now obliges me to deny myself the transport which the perusal of that angel's favour wou'd bestow."—"What do I hear?" cried Susan.—"Are you then—?"—"Undone!" said Henry, and departed.



CHAPTER VIII. An Incident of the Tragic Cast.
IF there is not a secret joy in being strictly faithful to the rigid laws of honour, our hero must have been at this moment of all men most miserable; for he might well presume that Isabella's letter was a kind one; and what had this world to give him comparable to a testimony of her kindness? Nothing but the consciousness of acting right. Educated in the most correct adherence to truth and rectitude, he had no sophistry to palliate the slightest deviation from them, and shuddered at deceit however qualified. Stung to the quick by his remorse for having been a party in the cause, if not the cause itself, of Fanny Claypole's misbehaviour, he took her shame upon himself; and vexed at the recollection of his own weak facility in falling in with her advances, he determined to meet the consequences he had drawn upon himself, unless rescued either by her voluntary release, or some such unequivocal proofs of her misconduct as

might justify him in renouncing the connection. Upon his return to the cottage, he found Ezekiel in the act of consoling himself with his afternoon's pipe, whilst his bible laid open on the table before him. The pious creature was in profound meditation upon the book of Proverbs, on which he was founding an admonitory discourse for the edification of Susan May, whom, though he had exculpated in the face of her reverend accuser, yet it must be owned to have been a slight stretch upon the truth of his opinion, extorted from him in his zeal for saying the best of a friend, and for opposing any sentiment of Claypole, who was just then in no high favour with him, or, more properly speaking, in sovereign contempt. Occupied in this manner, he took so little notice of Henry, on his coming into the room, that it might be doubted if he saw him; and Henry, on his part, had his thoughts too much employed to solicit his attention.
A messenger now rode up to the door, and being accosted by Henry, put a letter into his hands, the contents of which were as follows:—


My uncle, who sees most things in a false light, thinks you have done very unwisely in

declining Blachford's fortune; but money is his god, and love is mine. I build my happiness upon better things than riches, and admire your spirit; though I must own it wou'd not have been amiss had you taken the fellow's dirty pelf, rather than it shou'd fall into the hands of those low creatures, who are in the way now to profit by it. I shou'd like to live at Crowbery, and have particular reasons for wishing you to reserve that place at least to yourself, whatever becomes of the rest of the property. I have quitted the old mansion and its formal inhabitants, and am now entirely alone in my uncle's house; if you have any pity for a solitary damsel, you will come to me without delay: here are no spirits to haunt us, nor any galleries in which they walk by night. My house, my heart, my arms are open to receive you. What can my teazing uncle mean by telling me you are going out of England without seeing me? that I am sure is impossible; that I will not believe: the man of my choice will never treat me so; he has too much honour, too much love, too much pity for a fond doating heart, which such neglect wou'd break. I shall look for you this night, this happy

night; if not, with the first dawn of day at farthest; longer than till then I cannot live without you; think what I am suffering till I see you; lost to all the world but you, I have nothing to regret so you are faithful, and delay not to bless

Your fond expecting FRANCES CLAYPOLE.



This was a puzzling dilemma; Henry had promised his mother to obey her summons if she called him to her at Manstock-house; he could not therefore tell Miss Claypole he was going to his ship the next day, neither could he with any face come to Manstock without visiting her; if therefore he was ever to see her, better he should go before Lady Crowbery arrived at her uncle's; and whatever was to be the result of his meeting, better he should bring it to a definitive conclusion before he put himself in the way of Isabella, whose attentions to him, whilst his fate was in suspense, would embarrass him beyond measure, as not knowing how far he might be warranted in honour to receive them.
It was now about seven o'clock in an autumnal evening, the distance twelve miles, and

the messenger was well mounted: he was a country fellow, and no domestic of Claypole's. Henry asked him if he would lend him his horse, and take money for hiring another at the post town two miles off. This proposal, backed with a piece of gold, was perfectly acceptable to the messenger, and Henry stept into the cottage to apprize his friend Ezekiel of his motions, and to equip himself for the saddle. A very short apology satisfied Ezekiel, whose thoughts were farther from home than Henry would be at the end of his stage; as soon therefore as he had drawn on his boots, and signified his intentions of sleeping at Dame May's, he set off at a smart rate, and within the hour arrived safely at the vicarage gate.
Great was the transport of Fanny Claypole when the object of her anxious expectation presented himself to her sight; she flung the book she was reading from her, and ran with open arms, in an ecstacy, to embrace him: wild with surprize and joy, she scarce knew what she did; with her hair loose and flowing, she seemed a perfect Sybil in her phrenzy; her dress (if dress it might be called, that totally obscured no charms which nature had endowed her with) was so invitingly disposed as

shewed the effects of study and design rather than of chance or negligence; for little was concealed that could allure, yet not so much exposed as to leave nothing for imagination to supply; and a fairer field for excursions of that sort could hardly be found than in the form of Fanny.
When her flutter had in part subsided, she threw herself on the couch in a careless attitude, and observing that Henry kept himself aloof, and did not take her hint for seating himself by her, she demanded what was the matter with him? had not he recovered his alarm in the gallery? or was he waiting for another thunder storm before he could find in his heart any pity for a poor disconsolate damsel, who had no soul in the house to protect her but one old woman, who had neither eyes, ears, nor understanding? "Here we are," said she, "without one soul that will come near us for the live-long night, and what will become of me Heaven only knows, in this desolate mansion, unless you will manfully undertake to guard me, and turn into the vicar's bed for the night."

Henry smiled, and shook his head.—"Positively," resumed she, "I cannot part from

you; I wou'd as soon sleep amongst the tombs as in this dreary solitude, with no other centinel than the snoring old dame in the garret. Now I know as well as can be, by your looks, what is passing in your mind: my uncle has been preaching to you in his canting strain; but I take no account of what he thinks or what he says; I am independent of him and the whole world; and if you suppose my peace of mind can be disturb'd by their talk, you are mistaken; where I have bestow'd my heart I am not afraid to entrust my reputation: surely, if I ask protection of you, you will not refuse it to me."


"Certainly I will not," said Henry; "but as no danger can accrue to your person, tho' I shou'd leave you, and much to your reputation if I shou'd remain with you, can there be a doubt what I ought to do?"—"Ridiculous!" resumed she, "this over-care of what the world may say, if you persist in it, will make me doubt if I have form'd a right opinion of your character. When you rejected the temptations that fortune threw before you, it was a gallant resolution; but it is no proof of spirit to decline the favours of a lady. What care I if the whole world knew that you slept in this house? The thing

speaks for itself; I am mistress of my choice, and you the man I have chosen; let the world comment upon that as it likes. I have quitted society, and put myself into solitude for your sake; to whom then but to you am I to resort for protection, for consolement, nay, for justification? Where else shall I go? To my uncle? Never; I have done with him; I renounce him; I am your's and only your's. We have interchang'd our hearts: what witnesses do we need of that? Not all the parsons in the kingdom can do more, and without this their ceremonies are but mockeries; therefore let's hear no more of this affected tenderness for reputation, this hypocrisy of sentiment, which wou'd refine away the noblest passions of the soul; let our love be without canting, our confidence without restraint; and to convince you of my sincerity in both respects, I am free to confess that it is not to any real terrors I experienc'd in the storm that you are indebted for the endearments I bestow'd on you last night; they were the free effusions of my heart, and you may tell your conscience to be quiet on that score; for it was love, my Henry, not the elements, that threw me in your power, and the same love now

courts you to the same endearments, secret and secure from all disturbers of our hours so precious. Come then, throw off that cold reserve, those distant looks that have no sympathy with mine. My eyes are honest and sincere; they speak a plain intelligible language; what ails your's, that they cannot or will not understand it without compelling me, against the practice of my sex, to help you to a comment?"


"It is because I do understand their language, and feel their power," replied Henry, "that I avoid them. Either you think yourself less dangerous than you are, or me more firm than I pretend to be, when you beckon me to that couch."—He was proceeding, when she stopt him, crying out—"Come, come, there is enough of this trifling; more than enough of this ridiculous, this unmanly affectation. Beware how you provoke me; I shall become desperate if I am insulted." Regardless of these menaces, Henry kept his post, and advanced not a step towards her. She kept her eyes fixed upon him, and exclaimed—"By all the loves and graces, Henry, you have the form of an Apollo! wou'd to heaven you had his fire! Well, keep your pedestal, cold lifeless

image, and let me gaze upon you till my admiration warms into idolatry; 'twill gratify your pride, perhaps, to see me kneeling at your feet and worshipping you: mark, how naturally I'll act Pygmalion's part, and make love to a statue."

This said, she started from the couch, and was advancing towards him, when, preventing her as she was in the act of dropping on her knees, he cried, "Pray, do not laugh at me; I cannot stand your ridicule."


"Vittoria!" she cried, "I've made the statue move and speak. Now, since your marble majesty can bend, be pleas'd to sit beside me. Oh! all ye gods! it smiles, it animates, it yields, it softens with the touch; happy change! it lives! If the mere pressure of the hand does this, my arms, perhaps, may warm it into love: I'll clasp it to my heart, I'll breathe my life into its lips, and share my soul between us."


"Stop, Syren!" Henry exclaimed, "I'm not responsible for consequences thus urg'd upon me, nor am I bound in honour to repair them: whilst I believ'd your terrors in the storm had thrown you from your natural guard, and subjected you to weaknesses, which in a

more collected moment your virtue wou'd have spurn'd at, I felt myself a party in the treason, and tender'd you the only reparation in my power ('twas all I had to offer) my unworthy self; but when you openly declare those fears were feign'd, and freely take the blame upon yourself, you quit me of the atonement; and now again, when you return to the attack, and with such exquisite allurements tempt a man, who visits you with none but honourable purposes, and combats against nature to preserve you in that purity of character, which is your sex's ornament, I think it fair to warn you that my sentiments respecting favours in anticipation differ so essentially from your's, that she, who has been mistress to me with her own consent, shall never be my wife. Beauty, and wit, and fortune, you possess more than my hopes aspire to; but permit me to observe, that, flatter'd as I am by your attachment, chastity is a virtue indispensible in the female character, and without that I shou'd consider marriage as a certain sacrifice of happiness."


"Marriage! I laugh at it! marriage was never made for souls like mine: my love can never wait upon the lazy forms of plodding

mercenary law; I scorn them all; nor are you fit for the dull drudgery of that slavish state; too young, too inexperienc'd, and too choice to be made daily use of, your beauty, like a precious garment, shou'd be reserv'd for feasts and holidays; 'twas never made for the coarse wear-and-tear of wedlock; if you had thought of marriage you wou'd never have refused the fortune Blachford had bequeath'd you: I see it hangs upon you like a debt of honour, therefore I set you free; I'll not exact it of you; marry ten years hence, and marry whom you will; of this and every other obligation honour can impose I perfectly acquit you, only for this I stipulate, I'll not be treated with contempt; of all engagements I acquit you, but not of gratitude: Oh Henry! have a care how you insult a woman who has broke through all reserve, and laid her heart before you: after this night you are free; I resign you—even to Isabella."

How quick and sudden are the shifts of passion! a word sometimes will call up a new train of thoughts, and change our resolutions in an instant. It was not virtue's self, but virtue's substitute that saved our hero; sunk into the arms of the seducer, and resigned to

the temptation, the name of Isabella roused him like a spell; he started, sprung with horror from the couch, and cried, "You have redeem'd yourself and me: I leave you to your better recollection."—"Stop," she exclaimed, "unless you are resolv'd to be my murderer." Then, snatching up a sharp-pointed knife, with which she had been cutting open the leaves of her book, "by the eternal Truth," she cried, "I'll plunge this weapon in my heart if you desert me." Here she put herself into a menacing attitude, with a look of so much desperation, that Henry on the instant sprung forward, and seized her uplifted hand, to wrench the knife from her grasp: furious with rage, she struggled to keep hold of it; and in the struggle, whether purposely or accidentally we pretend not to say, lodged the point of it in his left arm, below the elbow: in the same moment he got possession of the knife, and secured it in his pocket: she probably perceived what she had done, for she stood torpid with astonishment and terror: he rang the bell with violence; an elderly woman came running to the call. "I charge you be attentive to your lady," he cried, "for she is suddenly taken ill." Then, finding that

the blood was flowing apace from the wound, and would soon discover itself if he staid any longer, he hastened out of doors, and stuffing his handkerchief up his sleeve, ran as quick as he could to the house of Goody May, which luckily was near at hand.


CHAPTER IX. Surgeon's Work.
IT was well for our hero that he had not many paces to measure before he found an house to take shelter in; for though he held his hand close pressed upon the wound, the sluice kept running apace, and his waste of blood would not have suited a much longer march. The widow was at home, and her hospitable door stood open. "Come, Mother," cried Henry, as he entered, "I have another case for you; more work for the good Samaritan." This said, he began to strip off his coat, which had no sooner displayed to her sight an arm covered with blood, than she gave a loud shriek, started back with horror, and fell a-trembling from head to foot. "Courage! my good friend," cried the undaunted

youth, with a cheering smile; "a good surgeon does not shrink at the sight of a wound,"—"Wou'd to Heaven I was a good surgeon for your sake," replied she, "or any way more able to assist you than I am.—"Take heart," he cried; "give me a chair to rest my arm upon in an horizontal posture, and fetch some lint to staunch the blood; then, I warrant, all will be well in a few minutes." Cheered with these words, the good dame bestirred herself, and presently returned from her repository with a large pledget of lint steeped in friar's balsam, which she laid over the wound, and bound it up with a swathe of linen in several folds. "Here's a piece of work," she cried; "Oh that Mr. L— was here to dress you! but let me send post haste for Doctor Cawdle; as for myself, God help me, it pities me to the heart to see your fair flesh hack'd and hew'd in such a barbarous manner: Oh the villain that has done this! I wou'd I had him safe in fetters of iron! some murderous wretch has stabb'd you in the dark; as sure as can be 'tis that bloody Captain you fought with in the morning; he has way-laid you on the road at night; but we'll raise the neighbours, and have a hue-and-cry after him, please God! Is there to be no

end to the malice of these accursed Crowberys?"


"There are no Crowberys in the case," replied Henry, "nor any malice, so put yourself at peace, and say no more about it; 'tis an accident, and nothing more; a mere casualty, owing to my own aukwardness."—"But how did it happen?" she still demanded; "I'm positive it has been the stab of a sword, or a dagger, or a knife, or some wicked weapon or other, for it has gone in the Lord knows how far." In this manner she persisted in pressing him with enquiries, till he found no escape but by taking a little more liberty with the truth than was his custom to do, and making up as plausible a story as he could invent to account for the accident: however, she still remained incredulous, crying out, "You are too forgiving; indeed, my dear young Sir, you are much too forgiving in all conscience; and tho' to be sure humanity is very amiable, yet after all it is an act of justice to bring the guilty to punishment, and you may depend upon it they will be the death of you some time or other, tho' I hope, with God's blessing, they have miss'd their aim for this turn."


"If you will go on in a mistake, my good

friend," said Henry, "you must; so there let us leave it: I have news to tell you of your daughter, whom you seem to have forgotten." He then related to her briefly what had been passing at Blachford's, and how he had diverted that dying man's great bequest from himself to those whom he considered as having a better claim to it.
When this was disclosed to her, with the circumstance of her daughter's being a mother, (of which, strange as it may seem, she had hitherto been kept in ignorance) the variety of sensations which the discovery of facts so affecting at once excited, seemed to deprive her of speech and recollection. Henry saw the conflict of her thoughts, and perceiving that in speaking of her grand-child he had opened an affair which till then he had no notion she could be uninformed of, instantly began to explain to her, in the most consoling manner, the whole plot which Blachford and his accomplice had put in practice to obtain their wicked purposes, and entrap their innocent victim.
Here the good mother's passion broke in upon his narrative. "Monster! villain!" she exclaimed; "Oh! that I had known his goings-on,

that I might have brought him to the gallows as he deserved. What cou'd possess my child to screen so vile a wretch?"—"Be content," replied Henry; "he has met his doom at last; and you have now the comfort to reflect, that by escaping the punishment of the law, he has liv'd to repent, and, as far as human circumstances will admit, to atone for the crime he has perpetrated: the son, which that dark transaction brought into the world, now survives to inherit the fortune of the father, and the injur'd mother is enabled to live easy and independent for the rest of her days; and who shall arraign her character?" He then concluded with what he knew would be the most healing reflection he could suggest to her, assuring her that even Ezekiel Daw, with all his purity and preciseness, absolutely and entirely acquitted Susan May, and had asserted her innocence in the strongest terms to the Rev. Mr. Claypole, in a conversation on the subject.
As he was thus discoursing, the cloud that had gathered upon her countenance cleared away, and the shower it had been collecting began to vent itself at her eyes. Words were no longer wanting, but, like a spring repressed,

burst out with increased volubility; they were the unpremeditated effusions of a heart overcharged with its own feelings; gratitude, astonishment, joy, transported her by turns from one to the other, yet she found expressions for them all, in broken sentences, after her manner, so that it was some length of time whilst Henry was fain to give patient hearing to her rhapsodies before he could perceive her spirits to subside into any tolerable degree of calmness; and perhaps it was more owing to her being exhausted, than to any efforts on his part, when at last she became quiet and composed.
This interval, however, was but short; for soon the recollection of his wound seized her afresh, and she began to moan and lament over him more piteously than at first: her imagination painted him expiring under the stab of an assassin; all his noble generous acts rose in review; accumulated obligations pressed upon her memory with such overwhelming weight, that her grateful soul sunk under it, and she cast herself prostrate at his feet, embracing them, and crying out, in broken accents, "The Lord of mercy save you! the widow's prayers protect and draw a blessing on you, in return for all your bounteous goodness,

and for this your unspeakable tenderness in softening to my poor heart an event that wou'd else have broken it, had any other tongue but your's reveal'd this dreadful secret to me!"

Here she was called off by a messenger sent in great haste from the vicarage to claim her instant assistance to Miss Claypole, who had been in strong hysterics since Henry had left her, and so terrified the old woman, her only attendant, that, after rousing the cottagers at next door, she had dispatched one of them to Dame May, as a person of skill in such cases, and stocked with medicines to relieve them. The dame had great scruples about leaving her wounded friend; but Henry insisting upon it, she obeyed the summons, and departed, taking with her a competent provision of such nostrums as she judged proper for the occasion.
In less than an hour she returned, having left her patient in a convalescent state; but in this period the hysteric lady had in her ramblings been so communicative, that the good dame, who had at least as much curiosity as came to the share of any one individual, had perfectly informed herself of every particular that could elucidate the mystery of our hero's

pretended accident: fraught with this information, she soon gave him to understand that she was no longer imposed upon, though he still persisted in taking it upon himself as a chance blow in the struggle, and that he was positive the lady had no serious intention of doing any injury either to him or herself. As the dame, however, was strenuous in unbelief, and he found himself rather faint and exhausted by loss of blood, he cut short the argument, by desiring her to prepare Ezekiel's bed for his repose; but as he well knew her passion for telling news was not a whit inferior to her pleasure in hearing it, he was very earnest with her to keep secret what she had heard from Fanny Claypole, or rather what she herself suggested from the ramblings of a disordered imagination, stating to her how extremely dishonourable it would be in her, who acted in a medical capacity, to disclose the secrets of a patient, which, he observed, would be a heinous sin against the inviolable free-masonry of the faculty.
Henry retired to his repose with the pleasing reflection that he had compounded a very heavy penalty with a slight fine, for such he now considered his wound to be; and indeed

the pure habit of his body would have accommodated itself to a demand of a more serious nature than this was likely to prove; for the knife had only pierced the fleshy part of his arm, without any material injury: neither was he the less happy in his present quarters for the testimony which every thing about him bore to the taste and benignity of the beloved person who had provided them: every object he now looked upon, every comfort he enjoyed, was of Isabella's bestowing; and whilst he fed on that delightful recollection, no wonder if the grateful approaches of sleep, so sweetly recommended, stole upon his senses with peculiar softness, till, by the magic of his dream, the air-drawn image of his beauteous Isabella rose to view, graced with ten thousand charms, and pictured to the heighth of fancy's warmest colouring, kind, happy, greeting him with smiles of love, consenting, melting into soft desires, and self-surrendered to his fond embrace.



CHAPTER X. Our wounded Hero bleeds afresh.
THE next morning Henry rose with recruited strength: the air was so fresh, and the sun so gay, that if we had any ambition to emulate our brother novelists in description, here is the very moment for it; but we decline the opportunity.
Dame May examin'd his wound, and perceiving that Dame Nature was in the humour to take the cure out of her hands, humbly resigned the task into her care, and contented herself with the simple application of a fresh pledget of dry lint, and swath'd it as before. She now set out her tea-table in its holiday trim, and administer'd the ceremonies of breakfast in her very best stile: when this service was dispatch'd, she left her guest in possession of her parlour, and address'd herself to her own domestic affairs in another quarter.
She had not left him many minutes, when her lovely patroness stept into the house, unseen by Henry;—"It occurs to me," said Isabella to the dame, "that something may

be wanting in your friend Mr. Daw's apartment, and therefore I shou'd be glad to look it over before he arrives."—Without stopping for an answer, she nimbly ascended the stairs. The good dame's thoughts were rather from home at that moment, and not present to the recollection that Henry's bed-chamber was not exactly in a state fit to receive the visit of a young lady; instead therefore of stopping her on the stairs, she hobbled after her into the room;—"Heyday," cried Isabella, upon looking about her, "what is this? somebody has slept here I perceive."—"Lackaday!" exclaimed the dame, "I humbly ask your pardon for not stopping you in time. Dear good young lady, be not offended with me; but indeed you was so nimble, and took me, as I may say, at such a nonplus, that I never thought to tell you that the chamber was not fit for you to come into. Sure enough, though, it was my sweet dear young friend, Mr. Henry himself, who reposed himself in that bed last night, (Heaven bless him!) and I have not had leisure yet to set the room to rights."


"Did he sleep here?" said the lovely intruder, as she was quitting the chamber; and just then recollecting that she was leaving the

survey unfinished, which she came to make, stopt and cast her eyes deliberately round the room, observing that she wish'd it was more worthy of her guest, "But I hope at least," added she, with an encouraging smile, "you took care to air it well for your friend and benefactor."—"Heaven forbid!" cried Goody May, "that I should bring his precious life into danger; there are wretches enough in this world too ready to do that, the more shame their's; but I say nothing; the Lord he knows their hearts and mine also, how it bleeds for him at this moment; and that's the reason I was so absent in my duty to you. Well, to be sure, the wickedness of some folks is surprising; I am sure it will be more God's mercy than my skill, if my dear Mr. Henry escapes out of their murderous hands alive."


"Bless me!" cried Isabella, "I protest you startle me. Is Mr. Henry now in the house?" Goody May answering in the affirmative, Isabella came silently down the stairs, and understanding he was in the parlour, turned into the common room which was opposite to it, making a sign to her follower to do the same. Here she immediately began a course of questions, which soon betrayed the communicative

dame into so complete a recital of every circumstance respecting Henry's wound, that nothing she had collected from Miss Claypole in her fit, and which Henry had conjured her to keep secret, was untold. There is reason to believe, this poor woman wou'd have gone to death for Henry's sake, whilst she was thus running counter to his injunctions; but to deny herself the pleasure of broaching a piece of news, particularly one so honourable to Henry, and so interesting to the hearer, was a virtue which her nature could not reach; a sacrifice her resolution was not equal to.
Henry, in the meanwhile, unconscious of what was passing so near him, sate in the little parlour with his eyes fixt upon the print of Isabella's father, that hung opposite to him, pondering in his mind the lovely vision of the preceding night, his imagination fascinated with the contemplation of her matchless beauty, her engaging manners, and attractive graces, when behold the sound of the lock drew his eyes to the door, which, gently opening, disclosed to his sight the very object of his meditations in her existing and substantial form, more exquisitely beautiful than any shade that fancy ever pictured in the poet's brain: surprized,

enraptured, he started from his chair, and in the momentary transport that deprived him of reflection, ran and caught her in his arms: instantly undeceived, and convinced it was no shadow he embraced, terrified at what he had done, he dropt upon his knee, and beg'd for pardon.—"I was deceiv'd," he cried; "my mind had left me, and was stray'd beyond realities: I saw you in my meditations, and, like a man delirious, seiz'd what in my better senses I would not offend for worlds, and know myself unworthy to approach."

What passed in Isabella's mind, whilst Henry was thus pleading for pardon at her feet, words will not describe, for she made use of none: it was not anger, for her looks were melting soft; it could not but be modesty, for blushes spread all over her fair face; no doubt but sensibility had a share in it, for tears bedewed her cheeks.
He was preparing to proceed with his apology, when a shriek from Isabella stopt his speech, and instantly he perceived the blood streaming from his wound.—"Behold," he cried, "how justly I am brought to recollection of my offence." Isabella, in the mean time, frightened past the power of motion,

kept calling out for Goody May. It was obvious that her sudden appearance had surprised him into an exertion, that had opened his wound afresh, when he inconsiderately threw his arms about her waste. The poor woman, terrified with what she heard and saw, in her confusion scarce knew what to do first; but recollecting, after a few moments, the process she had before observed, begged Isabella to assist in opening his coat sleeve, whilst she hastened to her repository for means to stop the blood. Isabella, pale and trembling as she was, summoned spirits to assist in supporting his arm, as well as in the operation of untying the tapes Goody May had sewed upon his sleeve, which she had ripped open over the wounded part. The business most immediately necessary was soon effected by the application of fresh lint and the former styptic; but Isabella's horrors at the glimpse she had of his wound were not so soon dismissed. Henry's attention was so totally absorbed in his care for his fair assistant, that he seemed to have no sense of what was doing to himself, and he would fain have dismissed the operatrix for hartshorn and water, before she had secured the bandage; but when he felt the

gentle touch of Isabella, engaged in the work jointly with the old woman,—"Who wou'd not gladly shed his blood," he cried, "for such an honour?" and now a certain tender glance from Isabella's eyes made answer in so flattering a language, that the heart of our hero, so far from sinking under its loss, seemed to beat with double energy and spirit.
The hartshorn and water was now brought, Isabella recovered, and her alarm having subsided, the prudent dame thought her presence was no longer necessary, and retired.

"We look'd for you last night," said Isabella; "my father charg'd Susan with a message to that purpose, and to prevent mistakes I wrote you a short note; but I understand from Susan that you did not receive it."


"I hope," replied he, fixing his eyes upon the floor, "she told you at the same time upon what motive I denied myself that happiness."


"She did," rejoined Isabella; "the letter I received from her this morning does credit to her heart and justice to your honour, not only in the trifling matter of my note, but in a circumstance of real self-denial, in which,

permit me to say, you have given the noblest proof of an exalted generosity."


"If I merit your praise," said Henry, "in either instance, it is in that which you term the more trifling instance of the two: it is no hard task for a man not mercenary to act as I did in the affair of Blachford, for it is a victory over a mean and abject passion; but there is some struggle to obey the dictates of honour, when it calls upon us to oppose the strongest impulse and affection that the heart can feel; but your commands to Susan May were positive, and I obey'd them."


"They were calculated," she rejoined, "for your accommodation; you had another engagement, and solicitation is in that case an embarrassment to a well-bred man."


"There," said he, "you lead me to look back upon a transaction that covers me with confusion and self-reproach; yet, if it were a plea your purity might listen to, I have enough to say that wou'd acquit my conscience towards the engagement you allude to, though nothing can totally exculpate me from folly and infirmity. A fortunate explanation with Miss Claypole, yesterday evening, has set me free from all conditions of atonement,

and I am happy it is in my power to assert with truth, that the promise I held myself bound to make was not a composition for the loss of innocence on her part, but simply for the risque of reputation."


"Whatever you seriously assert," Isabella replied, "I implicitly believe; but when you call your explanation with that lady a fortunate one, I should suspect you are once more guilty of forgetting you have a wound, that demands more care and attention than you seem dispos'd to afford it. If you are to shed your blood with such repeated profusion in every lady's company you chance upon, and one is to give, another to renew your wounds, I think you are in a likely way to become a victim to the sex."


"I see," said Henry, smiling, "that my old prattling dame has broke faith with me, and let out all she knows, with more, perhaps, than her information warrants; but in your heavenly nature I well know there will be found a principle of candour, that can look with pity on the extravagances of an uncorrected temper, and consign them to oblivion. If the tongue of this gossip can be stopt in time, we may yet suppress a story, that wou'd

do no credit to Miss Claypole; and in this I flatter myself your good nature will assist me. For my own part, I propose to wait here no longer than till Lady Crowbery arrives, who must pass this door in her way, and whom I am bound to see once more before I leave England."


"What are you talking of?" said Isabella, fixing her expressive eyes despondingly upon him.—"Can you think of leaving us at this moment, and trusting yourself in this condition on board a ship? Can there be any such cruel necessity to make so rash a sacrifice of yourself? Can my gentle Lady Crowbery require it of you? Will her humanity permit it? Nay, when you consider how disconsolate she will leave us, will your own?"


"Oh, thou angelic sweetness!" he exclaimed, gently taking her hand in his, "my gratitude, my duty, my destiny demand this effort, for which, if I might now expose to you all the motives, you wou'd confess them such as I must be a monster if I shrunk from, how severe soever the separation they compel me to. And can I look upon those eyes, and see them beaming with such soft compassion on me, yet

forbear to tell you what I suffer by this painful effort? No, loveliest of your sex, whom present, absent, my poor heart devotedly adores, it is in vain to counterfeit; you see, you know the violence I commit against my nature, when I suppress its feelings; you perceive I love you. What shall I say? How shall I palliate my presumption? Yet reflect with pity on my case; remember I have liv'd by sufferance in your sight; (cou'd I see and not admire you?) have by your condescension been indulg'd beyond my humble merit, with some moments of your privacy; (cou'd I converse with you, and not be charm'd?) in short, I have contemplated perfection in your mind and person, and fixt your image on my heart so deep and so indelible, that if to love you be a crime, I am unpardonably guilty."


"You are not guilty," said Isabella, looking down, and blushing as she spoke; "to me at least not guilty."


"I know," resumed Henry, "who it is that print which faces me reflects—your excellent father; I know your love, your piety, to that best of parents, and can well believe the patience you now hear me with springs

from pity; on that therefore I build no false presumptuous hopes; for I know the difficulties of my present situation, the distance to which it throws me, and I wou'd scorn to take advantage of your private moments for saying any thing in a whisper, which I dar'd not openly to repeat in the presence of Sir Roger Manstock himself: if then, at this instant, the fatherly eye within that frame had sight, though I might shrink from it a while, mysterious as I am compelled to be, yet in my conscience I shou'd stand acquitted, because I know myself."

A start of surprise from Isabella, and a look betokening curiosity, at this moment directed towards him, checked him from proceeding; after a pause, he repeated—"Yes, loveliest Isabella, I know myself, and hope I shall in time be known."

Here Henry stopt; it seemed as if the most important secret of his life was upon the verge of discovery. Isabella too was silent; she was debating in her thoughts whether she should urge him to explain, or repress her curiosity; the latter seemed most honourable, and she decided for it: at last, turning towards him

with a look of inexpressible sweetness, she thus addressed him—"Henry (so let me call you, till I know by what addition else to accost you) I wou'd not wish to have the keeping of a secret, that might cause regret to you for having parted with it; neither is there any information wanting to convince me you are nobly born; I am certified of that by my own observation, and have long been so. Honour, and worth, and genius may emerge from low originals, but elegance and delicacy of manners are rarely natives of a coarse and rustic soil. A strange idea haunts me: shall I confide it to you? I have really thought at times, or fancy may have feign'd it, that you have a mark'd resemblance in your air and features to my beloved Lady Crowbery, as I remember her some few years ago: this may be mere imagination; but I have humour'd myself in it the rather, because it helps me naturally to account for certain situations I have seen her in with you, which else might seem at variance with her strict reserve and delicacy of conduct: I can almost persuade myself you are after some manner related to her; at least these have been my idle reveries; but never did one

syllable to that effect escape my lips till now; I am not quite so fond of tatling as our good dame. And now, moreover, I recollect amongst the motives you enumerated for leaving us, you mention'd duty: be it so! we must conform ourselves to duty; but let me hope that we shall meet again."


"And do you wish it?" said he, looking tenderly upon her.—"Do I wish it?" she repeated.—"Oh Henry! Henry! if that's a question with you, where is your intelligence?"—Here the tears stopt her, and she leant her forehead on his shoulder, covering her face with her handkerchief.—"Heaven guard your life!" she cried; "may no female daemon ever more attempt it! Horrid creature! shameless abandon'd being! what phrenzy cou'd possess her! Come not in her way; oh Henry, I conjure you; never look upon her more; I cou'd not bear the sight of her; I blush to think that I have ever convers'd with such a woman. But you, thank Heaven, had virtue to resist her, and virtue sure, without a blush, may give the hand to virtue."

This said, she took his hand. The manner of the action stamped it with the seal of modesty,

and modestly it was received, though love was the inspirer: it was the silent contract of their hearts, pledged with the tender interchange of sighs and looks, that bade farewel, and vowed unalterable constancy: again she pressed his hand—"And are you now convinc'd," she asked, "how anxiously I shall wish for your return? Yes, Henry, I'm free to own, my hopes, my happiness, my heart goes with you."

Oh! ecstacies how pure! moments how precious! 'tis now, O love, that virtue's self may welcome thee without reserve or coyness; composed of these chaste qualities, honour may lodge thee in his heart's best core; yea, in his heart of heart; the moral hand may paint, the modest eye peruse thee in this attitude; come ever thus, thou best and worst of deities, or dwell not with us long upon the scene! this will not raise a blush; Heaven warrants these endearments, and nature in this instance borrows no excuse from sophistry to palliate her propensities.
And now the tender conference closed: a servant of Lady Crowbery galloped past the window to announce her approach: Isabella

saw the signal, and slowly rose from her seat; she paused awhile, and it seemed as if something was in her mind to say, which she could wish to give utterance to, but it died away in a sigh. Henry pressed her hand to his lips in silence, and they parted.

END OF THE SEVENTH BOOK.



BOOK THE EIGHTH.

CHAPTER I. An Old Man's Prattle in a wintry Night.
AS the state of society becomes more refined, eccentricity of character wears away; a writer therefore of the present age, who aims to give amusing pictures of the humours of the times, finds nature less favourable to him in that respect than she was to those who resorted to her for the like purposes a century or two ago. This cannot be denied; but nature still is inexhaustible, and there is no need to emigrate from her domain in search of novelty and entertainment.
Originality of humour, or as it is more commonly called, a new character, in play or novel, is the writer's first aim, as it is sure to be the first in request by every spectator and critic, and the chief test by which his genius will be tried; but when we use the term originality as applied to the human character, we cannot be understood to mean a new creature, a being

formed by fancy, and not to be found in nature, but simply a close copy, a happy likeness, of some striking character, whose peculiarities have a strong effect, either in the moral or the humour of our composition. The old drama abounds with personages of this sort, and as the moulds in which they were cast are now destroyed by time, we gaze upon them with surprise and delight, regarding them as non-descripts, or creatures of a separate species, though, at the time of their production, they were doubtless sketched from nature; and it is possible that the authors of that aera were not more applauded for their originality, than we of the present time are by our contemporaries. When the critics therefore cry against the stage as fallen off in its spirit from the old masters, and seem to think we ought to exhibit as much novelty, and produce as much surprise by living characters, as they do by raising the dead, who are out of memory and forgotten, they require of us a power, which, though the witch of Endor had, no modern poet now can boast; hence it follows, that some amongst us, who are indignant of reproach, however unreasonable, being hurried upon rash attempts, either spend their talents

in copying after copies, whilst they aim to paint the manners as they were in times past, or endeavouring to create the same surprise by modern novelties, find themselves carried out of nature and probability into the visions of extravagance and romance. This in its consequence brings disgrace upon the stage, by reducing comedy into farce, and farce into puppet-shew and pantomime: the novelist, in the mean time, breaking loose from society, runs wild into forests and deserts, in search of caves and uninhabited castles, where, forgetting every law of nature, and even every feature of the human countenance, he paints men and women such as never were in existence, and then, amidst the shades of night and horror, rattles his chains, and conjures up his ghosts, till having frightened his readers out of their senses, he vainly supposes he has charmed them into applauses.
But the evil does not stop here; for as a man, who runs mad about the streets, will be followed by a mob, in like manner the rhodomontade of the novel is copied by the nonsense of the opera; and whilst ghosts glide over the stage, thunders roll, and towers tumble, to the amusement of the galleries, the carpenter

plays off his machinery to the roar of applauding crowds, and the author, if he has any feeling for the dignity of his profession, blushes at his triumphs, when he reflects that they are founded on the disgrace of the theatre.
Let the author then beware how he is piqued into absurdities by his own vanity, or the false taste of the public; if the genius that God has given him, and the matter that nature supplies him with, will not serve the purpose, let him drop the undertaking. If his imagination can frame incidents, combine them well, and weave them naturally into a pleasing fable, he has gained his point; but an over-anxiety to produce some striking novelty will most likely end in producing some striking absurdity. All ranks of life are open to his choice, and he has a right to select the strongest humours he can find; but if he does not find what suits his purpose in nature, he has no excuse for going out of it, whilst he professes to be a delineator of the living manners: fancy may ramble as she likes, if she avowedly beats about for imaginary beings; but if she produces her own creations, and calls them men and women, or paints characters out of date, and passes them upon us for contemporaries,

she does more than she has fair warrant and authority to do.
What I have here said of character is applicable to incident: the writers of fiction are generally actuated by so strong a passion for the marvellous, that they seem to throw every thing off the hinges, merely to alarm us with the din and clatter they make. Of all wretched expedients, which barren genius can resort to, the abrupt introduction of casualties is one of the meanest; in the novels of the present day, we encounter them at every turn, yet they never impose upon credulity; for when the sick heroine at death's door threatens us with an exit, we are convinced she does not mean to favour us with the performance of it. Surely there is no occasion for all this; neither is the impression very pleasing which it conveys.
If that originality of character, which we have been speaking of, is now become hardly attainable, discrimination is yet within reach; and by a happy contrast of leading characters, although they shall not be really new, yet all the best effects of novelty may be obtained by an alternate play on each other's humours, by the means of which very comic and amusing

situations may be struck out. Amongst our countrymen, the great masters of contrast in our own day are Fielding and Sterne: Square and Thwackum, Western and his sister, the father and the uncle of Tristram Shandy, are admirable instances: Shakspeare had it from nature, Jonson caught it from Aristophanes; Socrates and the Clown Strepsiades, in the comedy of The Clouds, is, perhaps, the most brilliant contrast of comic humour in the now-existing records of the stage, ancient or modern.
Let me suppose I am now speaking to a young author, sitting down for the first time to his maiden work. The first thing necessary is to understand himself, the next, to know the age, in which he writes: when his nerves are fortified with a proper confidence in his own powers, let that confidence be tempered with all the respect, which is due to people of an enlightened understanding, who are to be his examiners and judges. It is a very sacred correspondence, that takes place between the mind of the author and the mind of the reader; it is not like the slight and casual intercourse we hold with our familiars and acquaintance, where any prattle serves to

fill up a few social minutes, and set the table in a roar; what we commit to our readers has no apology from hurry and inattention; it is the result of thought well digested, of sentiments by which we must stand or fall in reputation, of principles for which we must be responsible to our contemporaries and to posterity.
In the degree of entertainment our productions may have the fortune to afford, our expectations may be pardonably mistaken; but in what offends good morals, or sins against the truth of nature, we err without excuse; self-love cannot blind us in these respects, because it is not a matter of talents, but of rectitude and common sense. We talk of critics as of men set apart on purpose to annoy and censure us; whereas every reader is a critic, and publishes his opinion of us whereever he goes; we ourselves are critics in our turn, and what we complain of in our own persons we do to others; and though few think it worth their while to publish their criticisms, let it be remembered that some men's voices circulate further than other men's publications.
Let us, therefore, who write, weigh well the duty of the task we engage in, and let the

puerile practice of invoking the mercy of our readers be no more thought of, for, generally speaking, we are entitled to no more mercy than liberal-minded men will give us without our begging for it: I am aware of some exceptions, and am, I hope, as sensitive towards such cases as I ought to be; but I am now speaking generally of authors, who write for same, and not for bread. If these had all the diffidence they affect to have, how came it not to stand in their way when they resorted to the press? And why this terror of the critics? An author cannot be harmed by a bad critic; and why should he be afraid of being benefitted by a good one?


CHAPTER II. The best Friends must part.
WE closed our last book with the parting of Henry and Isabella, in one of those situations which we would rather refer to the reader's imagination than aim to describe. Happily for him, his friendly hostess gave no interruption to his meditations, nor did they

wander from their beloved object, till the sound of Lady Crowbery's wheels called him out to meet her. The chaise was stopt at the gate of the cottage-garden, and her attendant got out by her lady's order, and stept aside, whilst Zachary and the nurse, who occupied a hackney carriage, halted in the rear. When Henry's conversation with his mother was over, and they had parted, he engaged the driver of Zachary's chaise to take him back to Crowbery on his return, which was accordingly done, and he once more found himself in the hospitable cottage with his friend Ezekiel.
To him he purposed to dedicate the remainder of that day, and the next morning to join the ship, according to the notice he had received from Captain Cary. Upon his arrival, he found that Blachford had breathed his last, and Susan May, with her infant, had taken possession of his quarters at the cottage; he therefore determined upon going on that evening to the port, and to wait no longer than till a chaise could be brought from the neighbouring post town. When he had past some time with Susan and honest Daw, in discoursing on their affairs, and had contrived to satisfy their

anxiety about his wound, with as little violence to truth as the suppression of Miss Claypole's name would admit of, a tap at the door announced a visitor, when young Tom Weevil presented himself, clad in his best apparel, carrying a wallet or knapsack at the end of a crooked stick upon his shoulder, with a cutlass slung in a buff belt round his waste.
The preacher, seeing an armed man enter his house, started from his seat, and marching up to him with an intrepid air, cried out, "What ailest thou, Thomas Weevil, that thou hast armed thyself in this fashion? speak, is it peace, Jehu?"—"With your leave, Doctor Daw," replied the young miller, "my business is with the gentleman there, and not with you."—"Render up your purpose to my ears, Thomas Weevil," repeated Ezekiel, "for thou shalt not pass me to approach my guest, until thou hast answered to my question; Is it peace?"—"I know not what you mean by your question," quoth Tom, "for be it peace or be it war, all's one to me, seeing that I am come to tender my services to Mr. Henry, who, I understand, is going over sea to foreign countries; and as I bear, do you see, in grateful mind, that he has sav'd my life, I think it but

just and right to risque it in his service; and so I am here ready to follow him to the world's end; that's all, Master Zekiel, I have to say."


"And thou hast said well, friend Thomas," quoth Ezekiel, "therefore pass in peace, and make thyself welcome with a cup of my best ale, which I will forthwith administer unto thee." So saying, the good man went out, on hospitable thoughts intent.

At the same time old Weevil made his appearance, and repeated to Henry the same tender, in nearly the same terms, adding, that he had given his free consent to Tom's departure, for, God be thank'd, he had sons enough left to keep the mill going the whilst. "Tom," said he, "has play'd a little loose to be sure, but he has seen his error, and that is every thing. He is a good lad in the main, and has a grateful heart." Here Ezekiel came to them, bearing in his hand a lusty pitcher, and saluting the miller with a friendly nod, set it down on the tressel-board, invitingly full and frothing.
Henry now, having given his hand to the father first, and afterwards to the son, expressed himself very sensibly affected by the offer they had


〈1 page duplicate〉



〈1 page duplicate〉


made him. He was going out, he told them, with a gallant captain, in a ship of war, who might possibly fall in with an enemy before he found his port—"and who can tell," said he, "where an unlucky shot may glance? I shou'd be sorry therefore to expose my friend Tom to broken bones, tho' I know him to be a brave fellow." To this Tom replied, that he despis'd danger in his service; that he was ready to share his fortune by sea and by land; that he had got his father's leave, and had a longing desire to see the world; in short, that it wou'd break his heart if Henry wou'd not permit him to go with him. This was again seconded by old Weevil, when Ezekiel, rising up, and putting himself into his accustomed posture, took up his parable as follows:—"Thy zeal, young man, to share the fortune of him, who, under Providence, was the preserver of thy life, indicates a grateful mind, and I commend thee therefore; and thou, son Henry, must no longer oppose the laudable desire, which this youth hath express'd, of devoting himself to thy service, seeing it is no less a part of generosity, in some cases, to receive an obligation, than to bestow one: it sufficeth that thou hast ingenuously forewarn'd Thomas

Weevil of the dangers he may chance to incur in the course of thy peregrination. And verily I am myself at this moment in no small strait, having fully purposed not to suffer thee to depart alone, but to bear thee company in thy travels in pure affection of heart, knowing thee to be of a bold adventurous spirit, which pusheth thee into dangers; these, if by counsel and experience I cou'd not avert, I might at least have shar'd, being resolute to go with thee, if need requir'd, even unto death. But now behold the corpse of Mr. Blachford lieth yet unburied, and having been the happy means of turning him from the error of his ways, can I fail to attend his body to the grave, and not be present to put up a prayer for the repose of his soul? And lo! here is the damsel also, who hath suffer'd violence by him, and whose heart now faileth her through fear of slander, needeth one to console her and support: who then but myself, the friend of her mother the widow, and witness to the confession of her seducer, who was once a son of Belial, excusing her and accusing himself, is so fitted to that labour of love? These, not to mention the care of her worldly affairs, which lieth on me, are amongst the calls by which

the trouble of my heart is enlarged, when I reflect that I must suffer thee, son Henry, to depart alone; yet not alone, if so be this friendly youth, whose grateful tender of himself I do exhort thee to accept, shall be thy companion by the way. And now seeing the hour of thy departure approacheth, and the evening draweth on, I must be brief, as is my manner of speech, saying only those things which it were a shame to omit, and praying the Lord of all mercy to preserve thee in all thy goings, beseeching him to dispose thy heart to continue stedfast in his fear and love amidst all the temptations of this sinful world, and in his good time to return thee and this thy companion safe and unhurt to your rejoicing friends."

The good man having concluded his harangue, lifted the pitcher to his lips, and drank a farewell to his parting guests, for Henry's chaise had now come up to the door. Tom Weevil, whose offer was accepted joyfully, bestirred himself in stowing Henry's baggage and his own upon the carriage; and now the moment came when our hero, taking Ezekiel's hands in his, tenderly addressed him in these words—"Farewell, my worthy friend; whereever

Providence disposes of me, and whatever may befal me, whilst I retain life and memory, your kindness, benevolence, charities, and virtues will be register'd in my heart."—Then turning to Susan, who stood 
•…
ute with sorrow at seeing him prepare to depart, heir cheeks bathed with tears, he took her in his arms, and, after a tender embrace, recommended her to the protection of Ezekiel, saying—"I leave you to the care of this good man, who will also stand in my place as guardian of your infant till I return to you again: he knows the purport of Mr. Blachford's will, and will take the measures on my part as executor, which a prudent care of your interest will prescribe: I need not caution you to observe a proper attention to the amiable young lady, in whose service you will now no longer remain. To this your best of benefactors you owe the duty of a daughter, and you will not fail to pay it, for to his pious exhortations it is owing, that the father of your child was brought to a sense of the injuries he had done you, and induced to atone for them; at the same time take notice, that this excellent creature suffer'd not one shilling of the deceas'd to adhere to his fingers, notwithstanding every offer which, to my knowledge,

was repeatedly press'd upon him by that penitent on his death bed."—"This," said he, addressing himself to old Weevil, who was standing by, "is a noble instance of disinterestedness, and merits the applause of every honest man."—Then giving his hand to Weevil, he bade him farewell, promising him to take care of his son; and hastening out of doors, stept into his chaise, followed by Tom, and was off as fast as four nimble horses and two dashing drivers could transport him.
In the mean time silence reigned in the cottage: Ezekiel committed himself to his wicker-chair, and remained in pensive meditation: Susan seated herself by his side, and as he rested his hand upon the arm of his chair, pressed her lips upon it, and bathed it in her tears: old Weevil felt an aching in his throat, and applied himself to the pitcher without uttering a word. Ezekiel seeing this, roused himself in his seat, and cried, though in a faultering voice, "Courage, neighbour, we have only parted from our friends, we have not lost them."—"No, no," cried the miller, as he took the pitcher from his lips; "to be sure, as you say, we have not to mourn over the loss of them, but somehow or other it makes one feel a little

queer; for, as nobody can be sure of life for an hour to come, parting methinks is, as I may say, like taking leave for ever."—"Heaven, in its mercy, forbid that," cried Susan, and burst aloud into an agony of grief.—"Child, child," said Ezekiel, "moderate thy wailing; it becometh not us to give way to inordinate grief: what hast thou lost which I have not lost, and dost thou see me give way to this unseemly weakness? why dost thou not take example by me? thou seest, damsel, that I am firm and unshaken." Here his voice began to quiver, and he seemed fighting against something that rose in his throat, and would not suffer him to proceed. "I know," cried Susan, "we should not anticipate affliction, but when a dreadful image is presented to my imagination, how can I forbear to feel a horror at the thoughts of losing such a friend for ever? Think only what he has been to me; think what he is, how kind, how gentle, how benevolent! Call to mind his virtues, his sufferings, his humility"—Ezekiel groaned.—"What poverty, what persecution he has endur'd."—Ezekiel marked his assent with a motion of his head, muttering to himself, with a sigh, that it was true. "You, I am sure,"

said Susan, turning to Weevil, "have cause to bless him, you can witness to his good deeds, and you can also tell how he was rewarded for them; but let the dead sleep in peace; there are some still living whose malice never sleeps, there is no end to their attempts against his life, wicked wretches! it is to some of them he owes that wound, which he wou'd make us believe is accident, because he's all forgiveness: but I believe some villain has beset him: Heavens! what must that man's heart be made of?"—"Mill-stones," said Ezekiel.—"I wish I had them between mine," quoth Weevil, "by the Lord Harry I wou'd squeeze them."—"I know whereabouts they are," rejoined Susan, "and what their spite springs from; and now, my dear Mr. Daw, can you wonder I am afflicted, when such is their diabolical malice, that perhaps even now they have a plot upon his life, and are lying in wait to destroy him."—These words seizing the brain of Ezekiel, he sprung upon his legs, and with an asseveration not far short of an oath, declared he would that instant go forth and defend him. Susan, who saw the phrensy, cried out to Weevil to stop him. "Are you beside yourself, friend Daw," said the miller, "to think of

overtaking four post-horses with one pair of legs? what the plague, is not my son Tom there to guard him, and didn't they set off helter skelter as if the devil drove them? why by this time they are half way to the sea-side, and who shou'd stop them? Our friend Susan does but speak as all women do when they are in a fright; and I thought you was too much a man to be startled by what they say."—"I believe," replied Daw, resuming his dignity, "I am as much of a man as my neighbours, and not less of a friend to my fellow-creatures than I ought to be. I am not apt to be idle when the wicked are a-foot, and innocence is in danger. However, I do recollect that they went off with speed, and that there is little likelihood I can with all my exertions overtake them, tho' I hold myself no mean pedestrian, and yield to no one in the race on foot. Howbeit, I decline the contest against such odds; but no sooner shall to-morrow's sun rise than I will rise with him, and step over to the port to see if all be well; and, if aught be wanting, to stand forth in their service and defence."


"Wilt thou," cried Weevil, "then I am with thee, and will whip thee over in my

jockey-cart in a trice, you'll go as easy as if you was in your own wicker-chair. I will be here at thy door by the first peep of day. What say'st thou, is't agreed?"—"Agreed!" cried Ezekiel, "but hold, what day in the week will to-morrow be?"—"Thursday," said the miller.—"I protest that is lucky," replied the preacher; "for had it been the Lord's day I could not have gone with thee."—"Then give me hold of your hand," quoth Weevil, "for damn me if thou art not as good a heart as lives, and if ever I have slipt out any thing in the way of joke to offend thee, I am heartily sorry for it, and I ask thy pardon."—"Enough," quoth Daw, "and more than enough, friend Thomas; for I cou'd have credited thy good-will without an oath; however drink, and let us empty the pitcher."



CHAPTER III. Our Hero goes out to Sea.
PUNCTUAL to his appointment, Miller Weevil presented himself, by break of day, at the door of Ezekiel's castle, where, having seated the apostle by his side, directly over the

axletree of a vehicle, which, if it had been constructed professedly as an instrument of torture, might have done credit to the ingenious cruelty of its inventor, he set forward on a round trot, jolting him over ruts and rocks with a merciless indifference the straitest way to his point, till they came in view of the sea, with the frigate riding at anchor. Ezekiel, who now saw a period to the persecution he had endured for two long hours, took courage, and being just then in a sandy pass, availed himself of the first moment he could venture to put his tongue to any use, having wisely kept it still whilst his teeth were in motion: the scene was magnificent; the sun, which was flaming in their rear, threw a gleam of splendour over the shore, the ship and the expanse of waters, that terminated the prospect. Objects like these could not fail to carry up Ezekiel's thoughts to the Creator of all things; in his soul Devotion, eagle-winged, sate ever ready to catch the signal for soaring in its flight towards Heaven; accordingly he began, in a lofty cadence, to rehearse that portion of the 107th psalm, which begins "They that go down to the sea in ships." His charioteer in the mean while, struck with the awful strain, respectfully

slackened his pace and listened in silence, pondering the fate of his son, then floating on the surface of that tremendous ocean, in the mercy of Him "at whose word the stormy wind ariseth."

When Ezekiel ceased his recitation, Weevil observed that the words were very fine, though he was pretty sure he had heard them before. "I believe thou hast," quoth Ezekiel, "if thou didst ever hear the psalms."—"If so," said he, "I wish you wou'd double down the leaf for son Thomas, for I think every man who goes to sea shou'd have the fear of God before his eyes."—"And whither shou'd any man go without it?" said Ezekiel; and immediately struck into that enraptured passage of the same sublime minstrel, "Whither shall I go then from thy spirit," &c.

This again drew the profoundest attention from Weevil, who, at the conclusion, expressed himself very highly delighted with what he had heard, observing, that he firmly believed it all, and that no man could commit a bad action safely, for that God's eyes were every where; "and I make no doubt," added he, "but that villain Bowsey, tho' he has got out of our reach, will fall into the hands of justice sooner or later, and pay sauce for his wickedness in the end;

and as I hold him to be a murderer all one as if Tom had died under his hand, I don't despair of seeing him brought to the gallows in God's good time."—"Neighbour Weevil," replied Ezekiel, "it is not in the death, but in the conversion of a sinner that our God delighteth, and thou, taking pattern from his mercy, shouldst abstain from vengeance, seeing it belongeth not to thee, but to him alone. Forbear, therefore, to wish for the punishment of that runnagate, wish rather for his repentance. Do all things, my friend, in love and charity to all men; give thy heart to him that deserves it, thy help to all that stand in need of it. Remember that the law tries our actions, but God judges our thoughts. There is a rule, short, easy, equitable—Do as you would be done by, and you cannot do wrong."—"Why that's exactly the rule I follow," said the miller; "if a man does me a good turn, I requite him with one as good; if he does me an ill one, I pay him in his own coin; and if he robs and plunders me, like that villain Bowsey, I wish to see him hang'd; that's my way, and I believe it's very natural."

Weevil was not famous for drawing right conclusions, and Ezekiel would hardly have

failed to convince him of it, had not he just then turned into his inn-yard, under the sign of the ship, where he was instantly accosted by his son Thomas, who had just come off from the ship to procure some things that Henry had occasion for: one of the frigate's boats was waiting for him, and his job would be dispatched in half an hour, when he would go with them on board, where Henry was. This interval Weevil proposed to fill up with a good breakfast; for whatever his companion might think of the matter, he at least recollected that he had come away from home fasting.
There was a fellow in the kitchen, belonging to the boat, who called himself the captain's cockswain, who made himself known to our travellers upon hearing them say they were going on board; he had been taking leave of a nymph of the shore, who went by the dubious title of his wife, and indeed it may well be questioned if that honourable and happy title was more than nominal; she was however in tears, and Jack was comforting her and himself with a glass of brandy, whilst he repeated to her in a lamentable tone his parting vows, interlarding them with a continual repetition

of "Only be true to me, Poll;" and clenching his promises of reciprocal fidelity with oaths of so peculiar a sort, as made Ezekiel stare with astonishment, though he hardly knew what interpretation to put upon them. At last, when the fellow had pretty well disposed of every particle about himself to some devil or other, to hold in pledge for his constancy to his beloved mate, Ezekiel, though in close action at that moment with the salted buttock of an ox, laid down his knife and fork, and began to take the swearer to task. "Friend," said Ezekiel, "thou hast talk'd in so loud a tone that thou hast made us hearers of thy conversation whether we wou'd or not; I perceive with regret that in the midst of thy affliction at parting from thy spouse, thou hast exhorted her to constancy frequently, and in such a manner as argues a suspicion of her fidelity to thee in thine absence: what cause thou hast to hold in doubt the virtue of the wife of thy bosom I cannot tell, as thou hast stated no actual charge against her; but I shou'd hope the young woman hath not enter'd into the holy state of wedlock without weighing and perpending the duties of a wife, and also what a heinous sin it is to violate the nuptial bed: if she knoweth

this, what need is there for thy so frequent repetitions on a case so clear? if she knoweth it not, I am here ready to instruct her in her matrimonial offices to the best of my abilities."


"Are you so? you be damn'd," cried the sailor, eyeing him from head to foot with the most sovereign contempt; "I'll tell you what, brother, 'twill be the worst job you ever took in hand in your life. You, indeed! you, with those lantern jaws, pretend to talk to my Poll; you, with that lank carcase, for all the world like the purser's shirt upon a hand-spike." And now the lady, no less irritated than her spokesman, joined her treble to the base, overwhelming poor Ezekiel with a torrent of words not the most courtly, in a key not the most harmonious, whilst he stood staring with astonishment on them both, yielding however no one inch of ground from the post he had taken, nor from the upright attitude in which he stood, conscious of having given no offence, save that his zeal had innocently intruded a kind offer where it was not called for. But soon the din became general; for Weevil, the miller, had now turned out on the part of his friend, whilst the landlady, who exerted her voice for peace and silence, roared louder, and

with more fury than the parties themselves, who were vociferous enough in the controversy without her help. When this confusion was at the heighth, and the sailor, now roused, like the lion, with his own roar, was become ferocious, thundering out his oaths by whole broadsides at a volley, a stripling youth, or rather boy, in the uniform of a midshipman, stepping up to him, and catching hold of a button of his jacket, cried out in a shrill emasculate voice,—"What's here to do with you, rascal? hold your jaw and jump aboard, you lubber, or I'll make you change your doxy for the gunner's daughter."

Silence instantly ensued.—"Aye, aye, Sir!" cried the sailor, gave a shrug, pulled up his trowsers, and was off like a shot.
The youngster asked the landlady if the fellow had left any thing unpaid; and being told there was nothing on the score but a shilling for the brandy he and the lady had been drinking, he immediately discharged it, intimating to the aforesaid lady, that no more women would be admitted on board, as the frigate would weigh with the next tide.
Ezekiel contemplated this instance of discipline with surprize and admiration: the

boyish age and person of the officer carried so little authority in appearance, that he could scarce account for the immediate effect it took upon the boisterous spirit of the sailor, and the obedience it produced.—"Truly, young gentleman," he said, "there must be admirable order on board your ship, when an unruly nature can be so readily controul'd by a gentle one."—"I believe, Sir," said the boy, "we are as well off in that respect as our neighbours; Captain Cary supports his officers, and I fancy that's the surest way to keep the men in order."—Ezekiel then enquired after his friend on board, said that he had come for the purpose of paying him a short visit before he sailed, and civilly requested permission to be passed to the ship in his boat.—"Most readily," said this young commander; "I am only waiting for a man who is on shore on that gentleman's business, and I shall be off directly." At that instant Tom Weevil entered the kitchen, and the miller having paid the reckoning, Ezekiel with the father and son, under conduct of their warlike leader, proceeded to the beach, where the boat was manned and waiting. There was a heavy swell set in by the opposition of wind and tide, and further

out a bar, on which the sea broke in a manner not a little formidable to a landsman's eyes: the frigate was at anchor about two miles without this bar; Ezekiel and old Weevil were placed in the stern-sheets, Tom took his post at the bow, and the noisy fellow, now in office as cockswain, took his seat in the steerage, as perfectly under command of his beardless officer, as if the admiral of the fleet had been on board the boat. If Ezekiel was struck with surprize at the authority of the youngster on shore, he was still more so with his address and skill in manoeuvring the boat through a sea, which he conceived was every instant about to whelm them in the waves. The miller, who was as much a novice in navigation as the preacher, exhibited strong symptoms of alarm, jumping up once or twice in the boat, for which he was very properly reprimanded by the youngster, who ridiculed his fears, telling him if he was afraid of being swamp'd, he went the very way to bring it about. Ezekiel, on the contrary, sate still and kept a steady countenance, not that he did not think he was at the last crisis of his fate, but because he possessed a mind tranquillized by religion, and perfectly resigned to that all-directing

Being, to whom his mental ejaculations were then silently addressed. When they had struggled for some time on the bar, with lusty sinews and hearts of controversy, the young officer giving his orders with perfect firmness and precision, and all voices were hushed, but the shrill small pipe of a child, he cried to the cockswain—"Mind your helm and be damn'd to you! Steer steady; now, lads, give way all, and we are clear."—The energy was instantaneous; what cannot British sailors do? the boat was driven through the waves, the bar was passed, and they found themselves at once in deep water and a smoother sea: the little midshipman now bade them step the mast and hoist the sail; they shot before the wind, and quickly were along-side of the frigate. The humanity of this youngster gave orders for taking care of Ezekiel and old Weevil, as they awkwardly scrambled up the side; a lieutenant stood upon the gunwhale, giving orders about some fresh beef and other stores they had brought off in the cutter; and Ezekiel had another call upon his wonder and surprize, when he heard this lieutenant say to the young officer of the boat—"You have had a good tuzzle on the bar, Lord Frederick."—"So,

so," replied Lord Frederick, and immediately taking off his hat, whilst he addressed his superior officer, informed him that these two gentlemen wished to speak to Mr. Fitzhenry. The answer was, that he was then in the cabin under the surgeon's hands, but if the gentlemens' business was urgent, he would direct them to be shewn the way to him. Ezekiel expressing a desire to be instantly admitted to his friend, was put under the guidance of a marine, whilst old Weevil went aside with Tom to his quarters.
When Ezekiel entered the cabin, he found Henry with his arm stripped, and the surgeon cleaning his wound; a kind salutation was all these friends could interchange in their present circumstances.—"This gentleman," said Henry, "who is the surgeon of the ship, is so kind to take in hand this paltry scratch, and I assure you, he gives a very handsome testimony to our good dame's performances."—"A scratch, do you call it?" cried Ezekiel, knitting his brow, "it is a perilous stab! I protest I did not think by your account it had been any thing like this:"—then addressing himself to the surgeon, he added,—"I pray you, learned Sir, what is your opinion of this

ugly gash?"—"My opinion is," cried the surgeon, "that had it not been in the direction where fortunately it is, it might have been an ugly gash indeed; but as it is, I think it will be well in a few more dressings."—This he said without looking at Ezekiel, being then employed in applying a compress to the wound before he bound it up: having done this, he looked round for the speaker, whom he no sooner set eyes on, than he said, "Is it you, Mr. Daw? I am very glad to see you."—Ezekiel stared upon him for a moment, then marching up to him, and taking him cordially by the hand, exclaimed,—"As I live, it is my old friend and favourite, Billy Williams: never trust me, but I rejoice to see thee in the land of the living, Mr. Williams; heartily I rejoice at thy well-doing, for I have much bewail'd thy sudden disappearance from amongst us, esteeming thee very truly for thy towardly disposition and good qualities, no less than for thy talents. If I mistake not, it is now going on to two years since you quitted neighbour Cawdle, and we knew not whither you went?"—This satisfied Henry's curiosity so far, and as they proceeded in their conversation, Williams filled up the interval with an

account of himself in various ships to the present time, when having done his business with Henry, and answered all Ezekiel's enquiries, he respectfully took his leave and retired. And now our hero and his friend being left to themselves, had a conference of at least half an hour without interruption, when Captain Cary entered the cabin, who very kindly welcomed Ezekiel upon Henry's introduction of him: he lamented he could not ask him to dinner, as they were then weighing anchor, and should be out to sea. "We must think therefore," said he, "how to get you on shore:" and the first lieutenant then entering the cabin, he desired him to hail the tender along-side of them, and ask the loan of their boat to set Ezekiel and his friend Weevil on shore. They now adjourned to the quarter deck, whilst Ezekiel's attention was deeply engaged with the exertions of the men at the capstan, where, for the time they are at work, they enjoy a kind of temporary saturnalia, venting their sea jokes without restraint, in a most ridiculous stile. All was new to Ezekiel, but the heavy moment of parting from Henry hung upon his heart, and now the tender's boat was hauled along side; the frigate swung with the tide; the

sails were hoisting, the boatswain plied his whistle, the men swarmed upon the yards, the officers roared through their trumpets, Weevil was already in the boat, Ezekiel cast a parting look at Henry, threw his arms about his neck, sighed out a farewell; recommended him to Providence, and committed himself to the boat.


CHAPTER. IV. A certain interested Gentleman meets with a Rebuff.
THE tender's boatmen hawled off from the ship a few lengths, and then laid on their oars, and cheered the frigate, who now began to feel her sails and make way through the water: this roused Ezekiel from his torpor, and instantly his ears were assailed by three repeated cheers, in a much louder key from the whole crew of the tender, who had manned ship in compliment to Captain Cary: the frigate's crew returned the inspiring compliment, and then presenting her stern to the

tear-full eyes of Ezekiel, she glided majestically over the waves, scarce deigning them a curtsey as they sunk beneath her keel, conscious, as it should seem, that she was worthy to assert the empire of the flag which she displayed.

"Hurrah! my hearts," cried the man in the steerage, the boat cut through the water.—"There she goes," looking at the frigate, said one of the fellows at his oar.—"Damn me, but I wish I was in her," repeated a second.—"Have you then a friend," said Ezekiel, "on board that ship, whom you regret to part from? and is your heart agoniz'd with grief like mine?"—"Grief indeed!" cried the fellow, in a surly tone; "grief never came near my heart since I had one: I wish myself in her because I think she has a fighting captain on board, and there'll be something to be got to make merry with on shore: but belike you are tender-hearted, and take on because your friend is gone to sea; if that be the case, do you mind me, do as I do, when I part from my wife, swab the spray out of your glims, and think no more about it."—"I cannot be sure that I clearly understand thee, friend," replied Ezekiel, "but I presume it

makes to the benefit of thy country, that thou art void of feeling."

As this did not reach the understanding of the tar, it produced no answer, and whatever want of feeling in Ezekiel's sense of it there might be in those he had embarked with, there was such strength and alacrity, that our passengers soon found themselves safely landed on their native soil. A can of grog to the crew, and a slight refreshment for Weevil and Ezekiel, to revive languid nature, filled up the time, whilst the miller's cart was getting ready, which at length safely landed our travellers at Ezekiel's door, and not without many of those jars and jumbles emblematic of the troubles inseparably attendant on our passage through life.
Whilst Henry was now wafted into the ocean, and whilst the land he had left was sinking in the horizon of his prospect, the tender heart of his beloved Isabella had directed many a sigh to attend him over the watery waste. Lady Crowbery had arrived at Manstock House, less exhausted with her first stage than could reasonably be expected: Sir Roger, Isabella, Zachary Cawdle, every soul male and female in the family, were in motion to attend upon her, nor did the reverend

Mr. Claypole fail to be amongst the forwardest to exhibit his devoirs: Fanny, meanwhile, remained in sullen solitude at the vicarage, her mind experiencing the various torments slighted passion is exposed to. Her secret was entombed in Isabella's breast; in that of Goody May it had a more precarious tenure; yet for the present she adhered to the injunctions she had received, and held her tongue. Lady Crowbery had remarked the condition of Henry's arm, but had taken up with the slight account he had given of it, the rather because she perceived he had a ready use of it. Little, however, was said upon the subject whilst the family were about her, and Isabella did not think it necessary to speak of the interview she had had at the dame's.
When dinner was over, and Lady Crowbery's spirits seemed recruited by her repast and the company of her friends, an opportunity was taken by Sir Roger to introduce a subject, which he knew his friend Mr. Claypole to have much at heart, and which he opened, by enquiring if she had filled up Mr. Ratcliffe's vacancy. Upon her replying, that it was yet open, Sir Roger expressed his wishes in favour of his friend then present, for Claypole's

delicacy had not prevailed with him to retire from the hearing of his own success at first hand, of which he very naturally entertained the most sanguine expectation.—"Are you a party in these wishes of your worthy friend?" said the Lady, addressing herself to Claypole.—"I confess to your Ladyship I am," replied he, "and should hold myself infinitely bound to you for putting me in possession of those wishes."—"Mr. Ratcliffe was a constant resident," resumed she, "and, perhaps, you are not aware that I shou'd stipulate with his successor to tread as nearly as possible in his steps."—"I hope, Madam," replied the Divine, somewhat piqued at the expression, "I shou'd not fall short of my predecessor in any part of his practice."—"In some of his doctrines, I believe, you differ, Mr. Claypole, if I have been rightly inform'd."—"As how, Madam, I beseech you," reiterated the reverend gentleman, with eagerness, "in what one doctrine, fitting for Mr. Ratcliffe to hold, have I been found to differ from him, or fall short? I never had my orthodoxy question'd."—Sir Roger looked at his niece with marks of surprise, but being a man of few words, waited silently for a further explanation of this

mystery.—"In this respect," said the Lady, "I conceive you differ: Mr. Ratcliffe put a value on a just and generous act, that wou'd have led him to despise the man who gave him sordid counsel, or condemn'd him for a sacrifice of interest to conscience. This, I dare say, is your doctrine in the pulpit, Mr. Claypole, for I don't doubt your orthodoxy; but, allow me to say, it was his also in the closet; this he inculcated to Henry, whom he father'd, and who has nobly practis'd what he taught, by giving up the whole of Blachford's fortune to the son of Blachford: this you condemn'd; but this my departed friend wou'd have so decidedly approv'd of, that I take upon me to say, you differ in your doctrine; and being employ'd in seeking out some successor, who shall, as I before said, tread as nearly as possible in the steps of that excellent and ever-lamented friend, I can only tell you, that I have not yet discover'd the person that answers to my search."

Here the lady ceased from speaking. The persons present were Sir Roger Manstock, Isabella, and the gentleman himself, to whom the words were addressed; of these not one seemed disposed at that time to renew the subject; various motives kept them silent; when

Claypole, who had probably better dispositions for taking up the conversation, but less matter to support it with than any present, sullenly retired, and lest the uncle, niece, and Isabella, to comment upon it as they saw fit.
Sir Roger, who was not yet informed of the transaction alluded to by Lady Crowbery, and, to his great surprise, had heard his application answered in so different a manner from what he looked for, saw Claypole leave the room without offering a word either in support of his suit, or which might lead to an explanation of what he did not yet comprehend. Isabella alone knew the real motives of the absent gentleman for the proceeding, which Lady Crowbery resented in this manner, and at the same time foresaw the farther disappointment that was in reserve for him, when he should next have a meeting with his niece. Sir Roger, in the mean time, after some pause, requested to be informed by Lady Crowbery, how it was Mr. Claypole had been so unfortunate as to loose her good opinion? This drew from her an account of Henry's generous behaviour in the matter of Blachford's will, and of the sentiments Mr. Claypole had expressed upon that transaction, when he called upon

Henry at Crowbery. Every circumstance of this was new to the worthy Baronet, who, without hesitation, concurred in passing the highest encomiums on our hero, and concluded by saying, that he always suspected his friend Claypole to have a little more attention to the main chance, than was strictly consistent with his own way of thinking.—"Witness," said he, "his readiness to give up me and my parish for an exchange, which, upon calculation, cou'd not have benefitted him in more than a hundred a year at most, so that, I confess to you, it put me upon computing the price at which he valued the society of an old friend, whose house and heart were ever open to him. After all, perhaps, it may be too much to require of any man, that he shou'd love me better than his money; and as for his advice to our friend Henry, which appears to you so reprehensible, recollecting, as I do, how much it was the wish of his heart to marry him to his niece Fanny, I can account for his regret at seeing such a fortune as Mr. Blachford's slip out of his fingers."—"Heavens!" exclaimed Lady Crowbery, forgetting herself in the moment of surprise, "had he the assurance to suppose that my Henry wou'd throw himself

away upon that flippant flirting thing Fanny Claypole? I'll venture to pronounce, his heart was never that way dispos'd; no, no, he has better notions, better taste, and better pretensions."

The Baronet, though too much a man of honour to expose what had been passing in his house, was yet unwilling to hear his intelligence so totally decried, and turning to his daughter, said, he fancied she could testify there was some truth in what he said: this appeal came rather unseasonably upon Isabella, who had taken to herself the application of some words, which Lady Crowbery had concluded with, and she simply replied, that Miss Claypole, she believed, would not have been adverse to such a proposal; but she added, incautiously enough, that she was sure no such thing could ever take place.—"Indeed!" cried her father, "are you sure of that? Upon what grounds, I beg to know, do you speak so confidently about Henry's resolutions?"—"Because," replied Isabella, and here she faultered; but truth was too familiar with her lips to be held back—"because he told me so himself."




CHAPTER V. Let Innocence beware! Spring-guns and Man-traps are laid in these Premises!
WHEN Isabella gave this honest answer to her father's question, a light struck upon his mind, which some of our readers may think might have reached him before. Accustomed ever to behold her open brow without a cloud, and to hear her speak to him without faultering, the embarrassment that now he could not fail to discover, opened a new train of thoughts, and he instantly pressed fresh questions upon Isabella, which she had too much candour to evade. She told him how she had accidentally dropt in at dame May's that very morning, where she found Henry.—"And how came he there?" Sir Roger demanded?—"He had hurt his arm, and the good woman was dressing it."—"And did he tell you of Mr. Claypole's proposal for his niece, and of his own rejection of her?"—"I understood," replied Isabella, "he had an interview with Miss Claypole, which had been conclusive

against any further correspondence or connection."—"And how was you interested," demanded he, "to be inform'd of that?"—"I shou'd hope," replied Isabella, "that my father does not want to search into my thoughts, as suspecting they conceal what ought not to be there."—This apostrophe, and perhaps the presence of Lady Crowbery, checked for a time the curiosity of Sir Roger; Zachary also helped to turn the subject, by coming in with a medicine he had been preparing for his patient.
The reverend Mr. Claypole, who had left the room upon his rebuff from the lady patroness of Ratcliffe's living, had gone straight to the vicarage in quest of his niece: here he was greeted, not with the sight of Fanny, but of Fanny's letter, put into his hands by the old woman of the house, who informed him that the young lady had taken her departure early in the morning. This letter briefly told him, that she had for ever taken leave of a place that was rendered odious to her by the treatment she had met in it; that she made no doubt stories would be circulated disreputable to her character, but they could be nothing but the basest forgeries, which she conjured him

to treat with the contempt they merited; that she had discovered the young man, he thought so well of, to be half knave half fool, and, for her part, she had done with him; she added, that he had frightened her into fits by his awkwardness, in letting a knife, which she had used for cutting open the leaves of a book, run into his arm, and wound him. In conclusion, she apologized for the early hour of her departure, which prevented her from taking leave of him; but he should hear from her when she arrived in London.
Claypole's breast now boiled with indignation against Henry; he had disgraced his niece, and, which was worse, disappointed him of a valuable living; for he was too well informed, not to know that Ratcliffe had left it in a state that would bear a deal of stretching. In this temper of mind he sauntered slowly towards Sir Roger's, deeply meditating by the way: the baronet was no less eager for the meeting than he was, and having stept out of the room when Zachary entered in, encountered him in the hall. Claypole was full charged with venom he had brooded upon by the way; "I thank you, dear and worthy Sir," said he, with counterfeited humility, "for your kind though

ineffectual intercession in my favour. Having heard a character of myself so contrary to what I expected or deserved, I hope you will not think me petulant, if I beg leave to retire to my chamber for this evening, rather than meet the eyes of a lady, which had not us'd to look so unfavourably upon me, and for whom I entertain too high a reverence and esteem, to be indifferent to her contempt of me. Perhaps, Sir, you may have thought, as Lady Crowbery does, that this young man's conduct in Blachford's business is an act of high honour, and that I was a very shabby fellow to advise him otherwise."—"I don't quite say that," replied Sir Roger gravely; "because I believe you thought of him as likely to be a part of the family; but I confess to you, the transaction, as represented to me, appears a very honourable one on his part."—"His motives must determine that," said Claypole; "it is a cheap way of doing a seemingly disinterested action, when he gains the favour of Lady Crowbery, and the good opinion of Miss Manstock." Sir Roger started. "I own," continued he, "that I did zealously press forward a marriage, in which I did not altogether wish to make so total a

sacrifice of my niece, as to marry her to absolute beggary, but recommended him to reserve some portion of Mr. Blachford's property as a maintenance: this is the mercenary advice for which I am condemn'd; but, with humble submission to Lady Crowbery, I am of opinion I was sufficiently disinterested, when I promoted a marriage even upon these terms, and which I shou'd not have listen'd to for a moment upon any, had I not been persuaded, that by taking the danger of an obscure unpromising connection on myself, I was fulfilling the duties of gratitude and friendship, by consulting the interests of my patron and benefactor, in the most essential object of his life." Here Sir Roger again made a motion expressive of agitation and surprise. "And now, Sir," added he, "if I, who have been so long honour'd with your friendship, and so much profited by your hospitality, have appeared to you as a man insensible to your bounty and my own happiness, and one who, upon mercenary motives, was reaching after a better benefice in a distant place, I hope you will now discern my motives, and acquit me of such folly, and such ingratitude, as wou'd stamp my conduct, upon any other principles

than the real ones; for, in the first place, what cou'd I profit by the exchange, granting that Mr. Ratcliffe's living were somewhat better than my own, a fact which I have not been curious to enquire into: but be the advantage what in may, surely it wou'd not balance the difference between living upon my own establishment, and appertaining to your's; but when I foresaw, with grief of heart, that whether this young nameless fellow married, or married not, my Fanny Claypole, my station in this family had no lasting tenure, consistently with your repose or my own, can you wonder that I caught at any hope that offer'd me an opportunity of retreating in good time, without disturbing your peace at my departure, content that you shou'd even condemn me for the measure, rather than be driven, as I now am, to open your eyes upon the real motives for it?"


"Mr. Claypole," said Sir Roger, no longer able to refrain himself, "you do indeed open my eyes, which have been in darkness; but I must desire you will also enable them to see clearly all the danger that is before them, else, permit me to observe, that your friendship only goes the length of alarming me, but

stops short where it shou'd inform me."—"Sir Roger Manstock," replied Claypole, in a tone of much solemnity, "after the proof I have given how far my attachment has already carried me, I shou'd hope you will not suppose it likely to stop short, or shrink from any duties friendship can require of me. If this young adventurer had carried off my niece, I shou'd have held myself justified in serving you so far, and shou'd have seceded from your family in silence; for where wou'd have been the kindness or use in opening your eyes upon dangers, after you had escap'd them? You would then, perhaps, have set me down in your thoughts for a capricious, fickle minded man; but my conscience would have witness'd better things. But now that this Mr. Henry Fitzhenry, or whatever name he chuses to be call'd by, has thought fit to reject Miss Claypole, with fifteen thousand pounds to her fortune, and my honest attempt is defeated, with the sacrifice of my niece's peace and reputation, whilst he is extoll'd to the skies for his rejection both of her generous offer and Blachford's liberal bequest, what am I to think, but that he has friends in those who so highly praise him, who are too

well disposed to reward him for sacrificing my connection, and to ruin me in your esteem, (of which design I think you have already had some proof) for my attempt to take upon myself your danger, and defeat their wishes! And now, Sir Roger, let me make one serious condition with you in this place; consent to drop this matter for the present; Lady Crowbery is your guest for this night; separate not yourself any longer from her, I beseech you; change not, if possible, your countenance, nor abate of your good humour to either of those amiable ladies, who will wonder at your absence, if you do not suffer me to retire immediately. If any question is ask'd, why I do not attend at supper, be pleas'd to let my apology be a slight indisposition: the plea will not offend against the truth, for I am far from well." This said, he took Sir Roger's hand, tenderly pressed it in his, and hastened away.
When he found himself in his chamber, he again took out his niece's letter, and then for the first time discovered that there was a postscript over leaf, which he had overlooked in his first reading, there being no reference to it. The purport was as follows:—
The Gentleman took up his abode last

night with Mother May, a good commodious body, as you will confess, if you find, upon enquiry, that the immaculate Isabella shall have given him the meeting there (if she did, let Sir Roger look about him); I can take upon me to assure you she is fond of him; and it is my opinion, that in spite of all her sanctified airs, she is up to any act of desperation love can drive her to. Once more I repeat,—let Sir Roger look about him.
This postscript, so happily coinciding with his own operations already commenced, determined Claypole to set out immediately upon discoveries. His first wish was to sift Goody May; but of this he soon saw the impolicy, at least of undertaking it in his own person; he therefore bent his steps to his own house, supposing he might get something from the old woman in his service, and with whom his curiosity was not likely to subject him to the same suspicion. Of her he learnt no more, than that Henry had been a pretty considerable time alone with Miss Fanny, during which she never entered the room; but that just as he was going, he rung the bell with great vehemence, and upon her coming to it, told

her, that her young lady was taken suddenly ill, and charged her to be careful of her, and not leave her; that she did not then discover he was wounded, but was told it by Miss Fanny, who raved, and rambled, and took on at a piteous rate, being in strong hysterics. "As for what she talk'd about in her fit"—said the old woman. "Tell me what she said in her fit;" quoth Claypole; "it is very material to me to know what she said, and 'tis your duty not to conceal it from me." The woman then repeated, as well as she could, such of her incoherent sallies, as she could call to mind: they were made up of various passions, breaking out in confused exclamations; sometimes of violent love, at other times of hatred and contempt as violent; some expressions she recollected full of terror for his life, and as if she had accused herself of having murdered him. "At one time," added the old woman, "I was sorely afraid the poor young lady had been betray'd, and dealt dishonestly by, for she said again and again, that he had made a fool of her, and was a base deceiver; upon that I straitly ask'd her, if he had taken advantage of her in an unlucky moment, and had his wicked will of her. To

this she answer'd, no, no, with great vehemence; he had deceiv'd her in another way."—"Well, well," cried Claypole, stopping her, "say no more upon that subject; I am satisfied no real injury has been done to her virtue."—"None, be assur'd," echoed the old Dame; "I'll stake my life upon that, and Mrs. May will certify the same."—"How!" exclaimed he, "Mrs. May will certify! what knows she of the affair?"—"Lackaday!" answered she; "I was fain to call in help, for young Madam was quite obstreperous; and so as I knew neighbour May was knowing in those cases, I sent away for her, and well it was she came, for she quickly fetch'd her out of her fit, and quieted her.—"Well," resumed Claypole, "and what became of the gentleman?"—"Oh!" cried the old woman, "he took up his lodgings at Mrs. May's, and did not go off next morning till he had seen my Lady Crowbery, who stopt at the door, and took him into the chaise with her, where they sat together, as some of the neighbours tell me, for I know not how long, whilst my Lady's Gentlewoman got out to make room for him; nay, and there's more than all that, only belike you will be angry

with me for talking to you about matters."—"Not I," quoth Claypole; "I desire you will tell of all matters that you believe or know to be true. Did Miss Manstock come to Goody May's, while the Gentleman was there?"—"Aye, did she, as sure as you are in that place alive," said the hag; "and was all alone with him ever so long in the parlour that Madam has deck'd out so finely for a new-comer amongst us, when, as all the neighbours say, she might have found some of her own poor parishioners to bestow it upon, instead of a stranger."—"What's that to the purpose?" said Claypole, peevishly, "go on with your story about Henry and Miss Manstock; are you sure they were in private together?"—"Certain sure," replied she; "for just then I call'd upon Mrs. May to return her some bottles of stuff, which had not been us'd, and as I was turning into the parlour to the closet where she keeps her drugs, she laid hold of me in a great hurry, telling me I must not go into that room for my life; I, seeing her in such a combustion, strait thought within myself, how that something was going on more than common, and taking no further notice at the time, determin'd upon peeping

in at the window when I went away, and she was out of sight: I did so; God forgive me if I did wrong! and there I saw young Madam and her spark sitting lovingly together; not that I wou'd go to say there was any harm in what they were about; but if ever I saw any thing clearly with these eyes in my life, I saw Madam Isabella, with her head upon the Gentleman's shoulder, and his arm round her waist: Oho! said I to myself, well may our poor young Lady weep and wail at such a rate if these be your false hearted doings."

Well satisfied with the substance of this intelligence, and quick in discerning the advantages of it, Claypole departed.


CHAPTER VI. Cunning can hold off Detection for a while.
A NATURE like Sir Roger Manstock's was not easily wrought upon by the poison of suspicion towards a character like Isabella's: Confidence, long rooted in strong affection, was not speedily to be shaken; yet his happiness was disturbed, and his spirits

depressed. When Henry was spoken of, which he frequently was by Lady Crowbery, he was either silent on the subject, or contrived to pass it off; his looks at the same time were watchfully directed towards his daughter, and the effect of them was very painfully felt. When Lady Crowbery retired for the night, he attended her himself to her chamber, and contrived to take Isabella away with him. The night passed heavily with her, and the next morning afforded no opportunity of being private with her cousin; the sad hour of departure drew near, and though there was not more than time for such friends to take a farewel, which was probably to be their last, nobody dared to speak the word; all parties sate silent; Zachary Cawdle had the consideration to keep out of the way: at last, Lady Crowbery spoke as follows:—

"I had reserv'd many things to say to you, my dear uncle, but I perceive too late the fallacy of postponing those things to a time, when the pain of parting occupies the mind to the exclusion of all other thoughts. I shall therefore refer you for them to my letters, if my health enables me to write; if not, you will find a paper inclos'd with my will, to be

read by you after my death, in which my heart, and all its sorrows, is laid open to your view: be as tender to my memory when I am no more, as you have been kind and generous to me whilst living, and may Heaven reward you for it! if I have offended you in the matter of your application for Mr. Claypole, or in the manner of my treating it in the presence of that gentleman, I am sorry for it; but I cannot revoke my opinion of him, though I suspect it may appear to you as a very harsh one; but this is not the moment for me to prevaricate, impress'd as I am with the persuasion, that it is amongst the last I have to pass with you."


"Heaven forbid!" cried the venerable Baronet, and tenderly embraced her. Isabella, weeping, next presented herself, to take her melancholy adieu; Lady Crowbery whispered a few words to her as she was in her arms, and then, with assistance, rose from her chair, and was supported to the carriage, that waited at the door, where all the domestics of Manstock House were assembled, to offer up their good wishes for her recovery: alas! how fruitless!
Sir Roger retired to his library, Isabella to

her apartment. Claypole had kept close, and did not present himself at Lady Crowbery's departure. This was not unnoticed by Sir Roger, who did not expect to meet so strong a mark of his resentment: the solemn declaration made by that lady, under the impression that they were the last words she should address to him in person, sunk deep into his mind—I cannot revoke my opinion of him.—He was not of a nature prone to suspicion, nor had he that gift of intuition, which can discover the real character of a man, by tracing it through the windings and involutions of artifice and cunning. Claypole, by superior acuteness of intellect, had gained a complete ascendancy over him, and preserved it long; yet he had not a little surprised Sir Roger by his solicitation for Ratcliffe's living; it struck him in the light of a dereliction of his friendship, upon motives merely mercenary; but the artful interpretation afterwards given to those motives had put a very favourable gloss upon it as to Claypole's conduct; but it fatally instilled into his mind a doubt, as to the dearest object of his affections, and for the first time shook his confidence in his beloved Isabella. This was now

the painful subject of his meditations; and after opposing thought to thought, and weighing them calmly and impartially to the best of his judgment and understanding, he began to sum up the result of his reflections in the following manner:—

"Lady Crowbery says, she cannot revoke her opinion of Mr. Claypole; neither can I, without better proof than I am yet provided with.—If a small augmentation of his income cou'd have tempted him to turn his back upon me, I shou'd have doubted the sincerity of his friendship; for he does not want money.—But this exchange was not the way to gain it; therefore I am the more dispos'd to believe the reasons he assigns for seeking it.—He says, he wou'd have given his niece to Henry for my sake, for my repose,—and what can that imply, but that he apprehends me to be in danger; and how in danger! but that he suspects my Isabella to be attach'd to the young man, whom he wou'd have married to Miss Claypole.—This is indeed alarming; suspicion is always so; but I must not give way to suspicion without proofs; hitherto he has given me none. Isabella confesses that she met him accidentally at the cottage; what then?

her very confession of it shou'd disarm suspicion; and my child has ever been ingenuous and sincere. Claypole wou'd have me think he took a dangerous connection on himself for my sake; if so, he has had an escape; why then this resentment against Henry for refusing to endanger him? But he was eager enough for the connection when I first convers'd with him about it: he sought the young man, unknown to me, confer'd with him at Crowbery, and strove to persuade him to avail himself of Blachford's legacy; that cou'd not be for my sake; there is something here that does not seem to accord: I am puzzled how to judge."

At this moment Claypole announced himself with a gentle tap at the library dour, and was desired to enter. Sir Roger had well nigh entangled himself in his medications, and probably was not sorry thus to cut the knot, which he could not untie. "Well, my good friend," said he, with a sigh, "my niece is gone, perhaps for ever: I think you was not present to take leave of her."—"My presence, I am afraid," replied Claypole, "cou'd not have been agreeable to her, nor my respects acceptable."—"To me at least they wou'd, if

not to her," said Sir Roger.—"To you they never can be wanting," resumed he; "of which this tender of them is my witness, when I am fitter for my bed than to be about."—"I am very sorry you are indisposed," resumed the Baronet; "for I confess to you there was part of your conversation last night which has left my thoughts in a state of great inquietude."—"If that be so," replied Claypole, "I am quite at leisure to satisfy you upon any points you may wish to have explain'd; clear in conscience, and cordial in my zeal for your interest and content, I can never be taken unprovided with a strait answer to any questions you may choose to ask."—"I cannot doubt you," quoth the Baronet; "and shall accordingly avail myself of your indulgence. I think you stated the proposed connection with young Henry and Miss Claypole as a dangerous one, but which, nevertheless, you was resolute to encounter upon reasons that had respect to my repose, the nature of which I can well understand."—"I did so."—"Did you see it in that light of danger when you first started it in our conversation together in the hall?"—"I do not perfectly call to mind how I saw it, or how I started it upon that occasion; it was a night

of bustle and confusion; we had sate long and indulged freely at table."—"We had so," rejoined Sir Roger; "yet I remember you embrac'd it with so much seeming warmth and good liking, that if you was then projecting to make a sacrifice of your own interests to mine, you really mask'd your motives so effectually, that I was not aware of the concern I had in them."—"That they were my motives," said Claypole, "I can truly assert; that you did not discover them might very naturally happen, as I did not study the display of a disinterested action, and cautiously avoided alarming you with danger which I was in hopes to divert from you for ever: but, added to this, might it not happen, that I thought better of the young man at that time than I have done since? I am free to say, notwithstanding Lady Crowbery's decision against me for my opinion in that case, I did not approve of his romantic heroism in beggaring himself for Susan May's bastard: he held a very haughty language to me upon that occasion, and I do not think it became him either to talk or to act as he did in that affair."—To this Sir Roger replied, "A haughty language did not become him, and

a disrespectful one towards a person of your age and character was greatly reprehensible; but as for the act itself, I cannot but regard it as a very honourable one."—"Sir," said Claypole, "these are high-flown fancies; the fellow is a beggar with a fair face and a proud stomach; he lives upon charity."—"And that charity will enable him to live," said Sir Roger calmly.—"Scantily, I shou'd guess," replied Claypole; "some small provision Lady Crowbery may have made for him in her will, but I shou'd hope her Ladyship will not heap any great matters upon such an one as him, to the detriment of your family."—"There, Sir," returned the Baronet, "you are much more zealous for my family than I am myself: my estate is more than sufficient for all my occasions, sure it will suffice to portion one daughter."—"Permit me then," replied Claypole, "to say to you, Sir, without offence, that I sincerely hope that daughter will never have any other interest in Lady Crowbery's property but what that lady herself may bequeath to her as Miss Manstock."—"I clearly comprehend you," said Sir Roger; "and as you mean it so I receive it: and now I call upon you as my friend, to tell me, without

reserve, upon what proofs you ground your apprehensions of my daughter's attachment to this young man; suspicion is a serious thing; I am persuaded you wou'd not frivolously alarm it: be so good to tell me what you have discover'd in Miss Manstock's conduct."—"Pardon me," replied Claypole; "I pretend to take no other part than that of a warning friend; I do not covet the character of an informing spy: let the woman of the cottage be interrogated."—"Not so," said Sir Roger calmly; "let my child, with your leave, be fairly heard before I call witnesses to the charge against her. Let me at least make trial of her sincerity; she has never yet deceiv'd me to my knowledge, and I should be loth to take a secret course with her; and now as you have, with so much friendly zeal, made my repose and the honour of my family your own concern, let me request you wilt be present whilst I ask a few questions of my daughter as from myfelf." Claypole instantly started from his seat, and resolutely protested against such a proposal, saying that he had no desire to be made a party in family disputes, either by being set up as an umpire between father and daughter, or called to the indelicate office of

deposing against a young lady: he had spoken his fears in the way of caution; if they were investigated, he did not doubt but they would be found not to have been lightly taken up, but he confessed he had not sufficient firmness to assert them to the face of so fair a lady. This said, he left the room.


CHAPTER VII. Let the Man, who suspects, resort speedily to Explanation.

"CAN this be pure friendship?" said Sir Roger within himself, as Claypole parted from him; "I am willing to hope it is, but I can hardly think it has all the characteristics of it." He now went up stairs to his daughter's dressing-room, where he found her alone; she had been weeping, and was sitting in a pensive posture without any employment. He approached her gently, for sorrow claims respect, and in a tender tone he said, "You have been in tears, my child; but I cannot wonder at it, 'tis an affecting trial to take leave of so dear a friend with so little hope of ever meeting again. I feel it deeply too; I believe

my affliction is as heavy as your own."—"I hope not," replied Isabella, "because I am afraid I have more losses than one to aggravate my affliction."—Of what loss do you complain besides this of Lady Crowbery?" said he, in the accent of alarm.—"Of the loss of your confidence, Sir," returned she, looking up in his face with conscious innocence. The appeal was irresistible; the most hardened tyrant would have felt it; how could it fail to touch the tender heart of so affectionate a father? "Not so, my child," said he; "you have not lost my confidence; you will not lose it; you will merit an increase of it, your candour will confirm and fix it beyond the reach of doubt for ever after."—"In truth," she replied, "my heart is exactly as nature and you have made it; it is conscious of no guilt, and I have taught it no disguise; prove it therefore and examine it; tell me all that you suspect, all that has been reported to you, all that your own fears suggest, and leave no particle unfifted, for never can I be happy whilst any doubt remains to cloud that countenance which hitherto has smil'd upon me so serenely."—"'Tis spoken like yourself," said the father, his countenance brightening as he said it;

"and now, my dear, I shou'd be glad to know, provided you can tell me with honour to Lady Crowbery, what it was she said to you in a whisper when you took leave of each other."—"Readily," answered Isabella; "and the rather because it was advice that does her credit, tho' in justice to myself I must add, I did not then stand in need of it. She had observ'd you was startled at my meeting Henry at the cottage, she suspected Mr. Claypole had been alarming you on the subject, and she advis'd me to be sincere in relating to you every thing that pass'd between us: this was the purport of what she whisper'd to me, and this I am now most perfectly ready to fulfil."

Here it may be proper to inform our readers, that Isabella in this statement reported truly as far as she went, but candour, it is hoped, will acquit her if she did not betray what was further divulged to her in strict secrecy; for in that parting moment Lady Crowbery, impressed with a sad presentiment that she should never see her more, had imparted to her the mystery of Henry's birth, avowing him to be her son by Captain Delapoer, and informing her that she had made him her heir.

In return for this candid tender Sir Roger observed, that it was not merely the circumstance of her meeting Henry, and conversing with him without a third person present that gave him alarm; that must have often happened whilst he was a visitor in his house; but in this business there was a seeming secrecy and mysteriousness in their meeting that gave it the air of a concerted assignation; that his sudden departure without a word said or written to him by way of farewell favoured that appearance; and he added, that he could not well account for his declining a connection every way so flattering and so advantageous to a person in his circumstance as that with Miss Claypole, any otherwise than as having an attachment elsewhere.
In answer to this Isabella assured him, that her meeting with Henry at the cottage was purely accidental: he had a wound which broke out afresh whilst she was there and bled profusely; she staid with him whilst it was drest; it was a deep stab in the arm: she remained some time after it was stanched, and they were left to themselves; he then told her that his treaty with Miss Claypole was broken off; the reasons for it he did not tell, but he

certainly did not speak of it with any regret, nor did she believe he had ever considered it either as an advantageous or agreeable connection. As to her father's observation, that he had not communicated with him in any manner, she said she could only ascribe that to his fear of being questioned about his wound, of which she found him very unwilling to give any other account than in general terms as an accident, and even this she observed was unpleasant to him to speak of. "Did he come wounded from his interview with Fanny Claypole?"—"She believed he did."—"Then he got it there."—"She understood so."

Sir Roger pondered upon this for some time in silence; he then renewed the conversation in the following manner: "This is a dark business, Isabella: Fanny Claypole is a girl of a violent temper; as for Henry, I shou'd be unjust if I did not bear testimony to his good principles as far as I have had experience of them: his person, manners and behaviour are highly impressive; the situation in which I sound him, the unjust treatment he had suffer'd, and his deportment under it, prejudic'd me strongly in his favour; my niece Crowbery's protection in the first instance was natural,

as considering him the eleve of Ratcliffe and undeservedly distress'd: I warmly coincided with it: it afterwards grew more ardent, I was alarm'd at it; it now is become mysterious, and I cannot understand it. When I invited him into my house, I did not forget that I possess'd a beautiful daughter, the heiress of my fortune and the darling of my soul; but such was the distance of your conditions from each other, such my confidence in your discretion, and my opinion of his proper understanding of himself, that I own to you I foresaw no danger, and let me hope I have incurr'd none. But if my confidence has led me into error, or he, mistaking your pity for encouragement, has been rash enough to attempt your affections, it is now high time that I endeavour to repair that error by calling you to a recollection of yourself and me."


"And what," she demanded, "wou'd my father prescribe to me for his future assurance and content?"


"I wou'd have you keep in mind," he replied, "that I exact no other rights than nature has endow'd me with, when I require you, if ever you entertain'd a thought of this young man, to call to mind now in good time my solemn

declaration, that I never will admit of your connection with a man so circumstanc'd: I never wish to force your inclinations, have no unreasonable ambition to ally you to great rank or overgrown estate; but to absolute obscurity, to mystery, to an unknown creature, parentless and nameless, I cannot, will not sacrifice my child."


"How just and reasonable," said she, "is that denunciation! I seal it with my promise faithfully to adhere to it."


"Take notice," added the father, "that Blachford's whole possessions cou'd have made no change in my resolves, nor been of any avail to him, as he is."


"I understand it perfectly," she said, "he must be known; his history must be develop'd and his parentage clearly ascertain'd. Shou'd time bring that to light, and set him forth to view as unexceptionable in birth and condition as he is amiable in character and manners, may I not presume my father wou'd relax?"—"Stop there," he cried, "nor cherish such delusions, which will only prove you have him more at heart than I cou'd wish. Alas! alas! my child, I fear your eyes have led your understanding astray; I doubt, Isabella, you are

captivated by what the worst as well as the best, the meanest as well as the most noble may present to you, a handsome person."—"Surely, my dear Sir," said Isabella blushing, "you just now spoke with approbation of his principles."


"I did so," he replied, "and I will not unsay it. He has done generous actions, noble ones, that wou'd extort applause even from his enemy, which I am not."


"But he has enemies," she rejoined; "at least there are some minds so hostile to merit, or so perverted by malice, as to allow him no applause,"


"I grant you," replied Sir Roger; "but Claypole is angry with him for refusing his niece."


"Ah, Sir!" returned the lovely Isabella, "then Henry, I fear, will soon experience the effects of his anger."


"That wou'd be hard," Sir Roger observed, "as he suspected he had received one wound from the family already."


"But there are deeper and more fatal wounds than he has yet felt," said Isabella, "that he has still to apprehend; I have reason to believe that a stab in your opinion, wou'd

afflict him more than any thing his flesh can suffer."


"Come, come," said the worthy Baronet, with a parental smile, "Henry may have enemies, but I perceive he has one steady friend, and that friend has great power, for she is very near my heart."

With these words he rose from his seat, approached her with a gentle aspect, and, having impressed a kiss upon her forehead, departed.


CHAPTER VIII. She, who confesses less than the Whole, may save a Blush, but will incur a Danger.
ISABELLA found the anguish of her mind allayed by the preceding conversation with her father; it had not totally extinguished it. There were still some tender incidents belonging to her interview with Henry, which remained untold; yet upon reflection she could hardly be persuaded, to attach any degree of self reproach to the omission of such incidents in her narrative, as it was next to

impossible to convey by any form of words the delicacy of those circumstances which introduced, and the purity of those sensations which admitted these chaste and innocent endearments. How could she find expressions that would describe what was passing in the mind of Henry, when starting from his reverie on her sudden appearance in his room, he wildly ran and caught her in his arms, unmindful of his wound that burst instantly open? In the like degree language would have failed her to impress him with a just conception of those soft but guiltless emotions, occasioned by the sight of the blood flowing from his wound, by the tenderness of his looks, his language, and the mixt assemblage of enervating ideas at the touching crisis of departure, which had caused her to sink under a momentary oppression of spirits, whilst he supported her in his arms. This she despaired to paint in terms that could exemplify a scene, which nothing but the manner of it could strictly justify, and none but a spectator could completely understand.
Therefore it was that her ingenuous nature found a plea in its own want of powers for letting these small incidents remain untold,

and who that has a heart, which love or pity ever touched, but will subscribe a wish that they had been unseen?
In the next conversation that took place between Claypole and Sir Roger, the latter repeated the substance of what had passed between himself and his daughter; expressing his entire satisfaction in the result of it, and declaring in the joy of his heart, that he was now perfectly at ease with respect to his late alarm, about the inteveiw at the cottage. Claypole affected to receive this account with pleasure, saying he was very glad he had taken that method of investigation, which made the quickest dispatch in dismissing his uneasiness; happiness, he observed, was worth obtaining even by delusion, and for that reason he would recommend to him to sit down contented with the account he had received, though it was from the party concerned, and not expose himself to the risque of future inquietude by investigating the affair any further, or seeking after witnesses whose accounts might perhaps perplex him, by differing in some particulars from that which had been so satisfactory. He then with an air of indifference turned the discourse to some other subject, and left his observation

to work as it might, or might not, within the mind of his friend to whom he addressed it.
The next day Ezekiel Daw walked over from Crowbery, upon a visit to his friend Dame May at the cottage, bearing a kind message from her daughter, and inviting her to take up her abode with her at the deceased Mr. Blachford's house, where, by advice of her friends, she purposed to establish herself and the infant heir. He was also encharged by Susan to apologize on her behalf, in the most respectful terms, to Miss Manstock, for her not paying her duty in person, and with other small commissions to be settled with the servants. This brought him to the great house, after halting on his way at the widow's, and his arrival was announced to Isabella, as she was in company with her father and Mr. Claypole. She would fain have left the room to attend upon him, but the thought struck Sir Roger to have him introduced to the parlour, declaring that he was not only greatly taken with the oddity of his character, but that he esteemed him as a very upright honest creature.
Ezekiel made his advances in a respectful

manner to the worthy Baronet, and was by him very kindly welcomed to Manstock House. He acquitted himself of his commission to the young Lady after his manner properly enough, and then made an effort to take leave, but was stayed by a question from Sir Roger, relative to the amount of what Mr. Blachford had bequeathed to his heir: Ezekiel said that it consisted of property in Jamaica, which returned about two thousand pounds one year with another, as far as he could understand, with about ten thousand pounds in money, and the small estate at Crowbery; but he desired not to be understood as speaking correctly. Sir Roger said in an under-voice to Claypole,—"It is not so much as I guessed he was possessed of, but it is a great deal for a poor man to give up upon principle." He then enquired if there were any legacies: Ezekiel informed him there were a few; upon which Claypole said,—"I suppose you have got a legacy, sir;"—"No, reverend sir," replied the good man, "I have no legacy, nor did I covet one; it fits not the servant of Christ to be greedy after gain."—"Then I suppose," resumed he, "that it was by your advice Mr. Fitzhenry declined

his legacy;"—"Not so, sir," replied Ezekiel, "the first I heard of it was just before you came into my poor cottage, when, if I mistake not, you disapprov'd of that act, which in my humble opinion was a very meritorious one: but it is not by the praise or dispraise of men that actions can be truly tried; Heaven knows that excellent young man hath receiv'd little else but unjust judgment upon earth, and evil treatment from cruel hands. Even now he is gone forth to sea most barbarously wounded."—"Do you pretend to know then," said Claypole, "how he got that wound?"—"Yes, reverend sir," replied Ezekiel, rising in his tone, "I do pretend to know."—"Stop there, Mr. Daw," cried Isabella, hastily interposing, "I dare say your absent friend wou'd not wish you to speak of that affair in this company, or any other; I beseech you say no more upon the subject:"—"Lady, I obey," answered Ezekiel, "and verily I am beholden to you for your timely counsel." Silence now ensuing, honest Daw made his bow and retired.

"Pray, Madam," said Claypole, "may I ask without offence why you stopp'd that man's answer to a question, which I who put it to

him had a right to expect, and no repugnance to meet?"—"Because I am persuaded," replied Isabella, "he had received no account of the transaction from the person who receiv'd the wound, and I think it was both dangerous and improper for him to speak upon any other authority:"—"Suffer me to observe," said he, "that I do not see the justice of saving any man from the danger of a malicious story, when it is clear he has the propensity to publish it. Had he been suffer'd to proceed, we might have been led through the medium of falshood to the investigation of truth, and I might have had a fair opportunity of vindicating the character of my niece, as well as of punishing the wickedness of her defamers. But I perceive Ezekiel Daw, the itinerant preacher, is consider'd by you as a sacred person; and under your shield, Madam, how can it be expected that my arm can reach him, or indeed be rais'd against him? I perceive, Madam, there is a design to propagate a most villainous story, and to affix a murderous intent upon a matter of mere accident. When the wounded gentleman got his hurt, nobody was present but my niece; I am at a loss, therefore, to think from whom

else this evil report shou'd originate but from him." To this Isabella steadily replied, "Whatever term you may affix to the report, I dare say it did not spring from him, if indeed it be an evil one it cou'd not."—"Then, Madam," replied Claypole, "we must lay it at the door of some tattling gossip, who, gathering some expressions from the terrified imagination of my niece, when the sight of the accident had thrown her into fits, founded this malicious interpretation of it; and if that be all, I am sure the wisest way is to disregard it; for in truth their silly fables merit nothing but contempt; they pretend to hear things that were never said, and to see things that probably were never done, and then they fasten their fictions upon you and upon Henry, and perhaps upon every one of us in our turn."—"What do they fasten upon me, may I ask?" demanded Isabella.—"What I paid little or no attention to when I heard it, yet it serves to shew how ingenious they are in their idle devices not to let the purest character escape their tongues; what wonder then if their scandal is busy with my poor niece?"—"There is a mysteriousness in this story," said Sir Roger, "and I think all suck shou'd be fairly produc'd

with their authors, especially where a lady's name is made use of."—"I am clearly of that opinion," replied Claypole; "and I hold it to be a duty which I owe to you, to this amiable young lady, and to truth itself, not to let any report affecting her enter my ears without giving up both it and the author, whom I am the less inclin'd to screen because she belongs to me for the present; and as I am persuaded Miss Manstock can confute her tale, I shall instantly proceed to punish her by a dismission from my service, and sorry I shall be that my power reaches no farther."—"This is perfectly candid in you," said Sir Roger; "and what I shou'd expect from your friendship; but without more delay let us hear the story; I will venture to say my daughter has no objection to hearing it."—"None in life," replied she, "if Mr. Claypole has none to the relation of it; but indeed he has now gone too far to suppress it."


"It is soon told, Madam," said Claypole, "and I doubt not as soon confuted; but my foolish old woman at the vicarage pretends to say, that calling upon the widow May whilst you and Mr. Fitzhenry were together, she was prevented from entering the room where

you were, with so much appearance of alarm on the part of the good woman who guarded the door, that suspecting there was a secret, and naturally curious, as such silly old gossips are apt to be, she took her opportunity of peeping in at the window, and discover'd you in an attitude (impossible upon the face of it!) for the impudent hussey says she saw him with his arm round your waist, and your head reclining upon his shoulder."—"How's that?" cried Sir Roger with vehemence, starting at the same moment on his legs; "does the infamous trollop say that? I'll have her taken up and committed to the house of correction."—"No, Sir," said Isabella, "sinking as I was under my alarm at the bloody spectacle I had been surveying, I can still recollect too much of my situation at that moment not to remember that there was a person came up to the window whilst Henry was supporting me, and if this is the person she says no more than the truth, which Mr. Claypole has very faithfully reported, with what intent he best knows; but justice compels me to say that correction is not due to the woman." There was an air of so much conscious innocence in Isabella's ready explanation and confession, that Claypole instantly

perceived he had missed his aim in her particular at least, but in Sir Roger he had lodged his shaft. A strict observer of decorum in all its antiquated rigour, he only looked to consequences, not to cause; it was enough for him to know his daughter had submitted to the embrace of this young man, and that she had been a spectacle for vulgar eyes in that degrading situation; it struck him with a painful recollection, that she had suppressed this circumstance in the account she had given him at first; and turning a severe look to his daughter, he said, "Isabella, you never see that young man again whilst you live; at least within my doors never. You have deceiv'd me, child, for the first time: you have conceal'd from me a fact, whilst you made me believe you had ingenuously related the whole of what pass'd between you. You have been discover'd in a situation unfit for you to be seen in by a peasant in the parish, who, having gratified her own curiosity, will not spare to gratify the curiosity of others, and the tale will be circulated through the neighbourhood, to your shame and to mine."

To this our heroine instantly replied as follows:—"When I assure my father that such

was the state of my nerves at the time I was discover'd in the situation Mr. Claypole has been describing, that I must have sunk upon the floor had not Henry prevented it, I flatter myself I shall not be thought guilty of any great offence against propriety in accepting of his support, neither, perhaps, can he be justly condemn'd for giving it. I hope I have not hitherto been found so disingenuous as not to deserve credit for what I assert, nor so flippant as to be thought capable of throwing myself voluntarily into any man's arms. The sight of a deep and terrible wound streaming with blood upon the floor, and the assistance that humanity compell'd me to give in stanching the wound, was a scene so new and alarming to me that my spirits cou'd not stand against it. I confess to you I supprest this circumstance in my discourse with you, but I had motives for so doing which did not spring from any consciousness of guilt or dread of explanation on my own part: my silence had respect to others, not to myself; and the same motives that led me to stop Ezekiel Daw just now from speaking on this subject, operated with me, and will operate, for avoiding as far as it is in my power any mention of that affair." She then turned

to Mr. Claypole, and, in a calm, unembarrassed accent, said, "You will now perceive, that your foolish old woman, as you call her, has done nothing to incur your displeasure, or to merit the punishment you threaten her with; she had only the curiosity to peep in at a window, and seems to have related to you, very faithfully, what she discover'd, which you, Sir, as faithfully, have related to my father; this, no doubt, you did in the pure spirit of friendship to my father; and I have only to say, for his sake, that I hope this will be the last proof of your friendship, accompanied with pain to him, and that every subsequent one will communicate nothing but pleasure. You have, however, told him something, which I had not told him, and so far I am made to appear evasive and disingenuous; but I have given you the clue to my exculpation, and, if you have a mind to pursue it, you will be led to the clear understanding of my motives. I am willing to interpret the part you have taken as meant for my good; and, indeed, if I have been guilty of thinking more favourably of this mysterious young man, than you conceive I ought to think, your measures have been so far crown'd with success, that you have

had the satisfaction to hear my father declare, that I am never again to see that person whilst I live, at least within his doors. To this I answer, I have never yet disobey'd my father's commands, nor ever will; let him therefore repeat that solemn denunciation again, and here I am ready as solemnly to pledge myself to the observance of it, let it cost me what it will. I desire to live but to please him, and only whilst I please him; and tho' I don't wish to hold back the very high opinion I entertain of this proscrib'd young man, (or, if you please to give it any other name that purity may acknowledge, I will confess to that) yet I now declare, I will never hereafter hold correspondence, direct or indirect, with him, unless it shall be with the privity and consent, nay, even by the requisition and desire, of my father himself. This, Sir, I presume, will satisfy you, if you are sincerely bent to oppose my attachment; and if my dear father is truly desirous to interdict it, he will, I dare say, confide in what I have promis'd."




CHAPTER IX. A tempting Offer honourably withstood.
TO this defence Claypole made no reply, neither did Sir Roger seem in haste to speak; for the gust of anger, which artifice had raised, innocence and truth had now dispelled. He turned his eyes upon the accuser first, and then upon his daughter; each look was decisive to the party it was addressed to; neither of them stood in need of any further explanation of the opinion he entertained; at last, turning to Claypole, he said, "I think, Sir, it had been better for us both if you had not listen'd to this eaves-dropper; for it appears to me, that you have gather'd nothing from her information, but what my Isabella has very naturally accounted for.—"It is very well," replied Claypole; "I know the consequences of over-zealous friendship, and none can accrue to me, which I am not prepar'd for." With these words he left the room.

"He is very angry," said Sir Roger; "but his disappointments vex him: rebuff'd by Lady Crowbery, rebuff'd by Henry, and tormented

with his niece, his vexations have follow'd close upon one another; we must make allowances for men's tempers, and Claypole's is not the most patient, therefore let it pass; we'll say no more of him: and now, my child, a word or two with you upon what is nearest to my heart—your happiness, and a right understanding betwixt us. It is clear to me, Isabella, that you are attach'd to this young unknown; that is a very serious thing, truly; for who is he, and what is he? If you can answer to these points, explain to me, satisfy me. I am not greedy of wealth, I am not ambitious of titles for you; but the character and condition of a gentleman is an indispensible requisite in the person of my son in-law; I cannot away with obscurity or meanness; therefore, if you know any thing of Henry, tell it to me; 'tis your own concern, and, if a secret, I will not reveal it."


"I am sure you wou'd not," replied she; "and was a secret imparted to me, under strict injunctions to keep it inviolable, I am no less sure, you wou'd hold me base, shou'd I reveal it; I hope, therefore, you will not regard it as a breach of duty, if I decline an answer to your question."


"Hold there," replied the father; "I am

apt to think it is a part of your duty to take no secrets into your trust in which I am not to share, especially when they are committed to you by a young man like Henry."—"But if I have it not from him," said she, "the case does not apply."


"No matter," rejoined he; "it is of him, it relates to him, and that's reason enough why I shou'd know it. In one word, Isabella, give me up the matter of your information without the author of it, and if it appears, to my satisfaction, that this young man is by birth a gentleman, and such as I can with propriety adopt into my family, I pass my word to you, that I will no longer oppose myself to your inclinations, for his character and manners please me, and I can well believe his person not less engaging; but if you will not confide to me what you know of this young man, I shall take for granted it is not fit to be known, and, in that persuasion, exert the authority of a father for laying my injunctions upon you, never to let me see his face, or hear his name again; neither shall I forgive you, if I discover that you carry on any correspondence with him, or about him. This, Isabella, is your alternative; now take your choice, and the consequences of your choice."


A stronger temptation than was now offered to Isabella could hardly present itself; but her steady nature rejected it without scruple, and, by persisting in her good faith to Lady Crowbery, she incurred, to her infinite regret, the displeasure of her father, most tenderly belov'd: the conference, therefore, concluded in anger on his part, and in a solemn promise on her's, to hold no correspondence with Henry, nor, even through her cousin Lady Crowbery, about him in future. Time, it is true, might probably develope the mystery which her honour would not suffer her to do, and to that alone she trusted for a justification of her silence, both towards her father and her lover.
The Rev. Mr. Claypole, meanwhile, betook himself in sullen discontent to his chamber, there to meditate upon future measures: in the interim, a letter was delivered to him, which had come by special messenger from Crowbery Castle, the contents of which were as follow:—



My dear Uncle,

In consequence of a most polite invitation from the worthy Lord of this castle, I have been prevail'd upon to take up my abode here for a few days. The chief inducement with me for accepting this solicitation was,

the opportunity it affords me of being within reach of my dear uncle, without the pain of taking up my residence in the same place with a family from whom I have received the most unhandsome treatment. Nothing can exceed the kindness and attention of Lord Crowbery, and I am charged by him, in the most earnest manner, to request the favour of your company at the castle: I am sure you will not regret the change from Manstock House; and, if I have any interest with you, his request will be complied with the rather as I find myself, in Lady Crowbery's absence, in a situation to stand in need of your cover and protection, being at present the only female visitor in the house.

I am, ever your's, FRANCES CLAYPOLE.



Nothing could be more acceptable to Mr. Claypole, in his present state of mind, than the invitation which this letter conveyed; it relieved him from a situation, of which he was heartily sick, and offered him the gratification of putting a slight upon Lady Crowbery, of the most pointed sort: he well knew how it would be felt by Sir Roger Manstock, and on

that very account he embraced it the more readily; for there was no longer any trace of past favours in his memory, and of favours to come all expectation was at an end. He had, however, views upon futurity in Lord Crowbery's particular; for he had seen enough of Lady Crowbery, to set her down, in his account, as a dead woman, and his niece Fanny was a very lively one. He had more than once taken her with him to the castle, in times when better harmony subsisted between the families, and on those visits Fanny had made her way much better with the lord than with the lady of the house, with the latter of whom, to say the truth, she was in no great favour. The fact was, that Lady Crowbery regarded her character with contempt, and Fanny imputed it to jealousy; to rouse this passion was a gratification too agreeable to be resisted, and therefore, though his Lordship was nothing less than an Adonis, there was amusement at least in the experiment, and she considered it as no small triumph to engage the attention of a man, who was capable of neglecting a most lovely woman, and devoting himself to her. Her purpose in hastening from the vicarage, in the manner we have related, was with the

view of obtaining one more interview with Henry, or, at least, of gaining such intelligence as might satisfy her as to the consequences of his wound; she therefore boldly shaped her course towards the port he was to embark at, but in passing through the village of Crowbery, luckily fell in with the noble proprietor, who was cheering his spirits with a morning ride, in his lady's absence, and, after some importunity, prevailed upon her to stop short in her progress, and repose herself in the castle. Here she remained some time, till propriety, or something else, dictated to her the expedient of writing to her uncle in manner above related, to which his Lordship, with equal propriety, very courteously acceded.
Sir Roger Manstock, who perceived that his daughter was in possession of a secret that he could not extort from her, concluded, very naturally, that it came from Lady Crowbery; and this brought to his recollection, what she had said to him upon their parting, relative to the paper she had inclosed under the same cover with her will, to be opened after her death. This packet he had deposited in his strong box; it was under four seals, and evidently enveloped more papers than one: he

had no doubt, from Isabella's answers, that the secret she had in charge from Lady Crowbery related to Henry's birth, and that it would be discovered upon the opening of this packet. He could not reconcile to himself the being excluded from a confidence which had been reposed in his daughter, and was not a little discontented to find, that his niece had referred him to her death for a discovery that she had already made to Isabella.
He now summoned Isabella to him, and holding Lady Crowbery's packet in his hand, addressed himself to her as follows:—"I am here encharged with a paper, seal'd as you see, containing your cousin's will, and other private matters, which are only to be open'd by me upon the event of her death: I have no doubt but it incloses a discovery of that very secret, which she has already imparted to you, and that it refers to the mystery of this young man's birth, who has caus'd so much unhappiness to me and my family. I understand withal, that I am to be the executor of this will, and, most probably, of certain instructions and trusts relative to the gentleman, who is then, for the first time, to be made known to me. Now these are terms that I will not

agree to; I am no dealer in obscure matters, and it is therefore become my fixt resolution peremptorily to decline the commission, and so to inform Lady Crowbery, by special express, unless you are prepar'd to tell me what it is you know of these secret contents, so far as they relate to the person called Henry Fitz-Henry; for I do not hold it becoming me, in any respect, to be surpris'd into a trust that may involve me with a person whom at present I have every reason to hold at distance, and for whom, perhaps, I may never choose to be concern'd, even in the most trifling degree. Now then, Isabella, let me ask you, if what I have been saying seems reasonable, and whether you rightly comprehend it?" To this she replied in the affirmative; upon which he thus proceeded:—"If it is reasonable then that I shou'd not be blindly committed in a business I am ignorant of, and if you are interested to retain these papers in my hands, rather than to have them sent back to her from whom they came, you have the alternative at your choice; tell me what you know of them, or take the consequences, and abide by the promise you have made me: never let me hear the name of Henry Fitz-Henry from your lips any more."



"If that be the alternative," replied the lovely Isabella, whilst the tears started in her eyes, "necessity imposes the hard task upon me of abiding by the painful consequences you have stated. Can I violate my promise? Ought not every trust to be held sacred? This is of all most sacred, and I dare not betray it. Let me then, for the last time in your hearing, declare, that wherever this discarded person, whose name I will not utter in your ears, shall betake himself, he carries with him, to the end of life, my prayers, my blessings, my unalienable affections, and my heart for ever; but let not this ingenuous confession of my love shake your confidence in my honour, for upon my knees I take to witness truth, and Heaven itself, that I will faithfully perform the promise I have made you, and, renouncing him, devote myself to your commands and to my duty."




CHAPTER X. Where is the Daughter, that may not take a Lesson from our Heroine?
THE definitive answer, which our last chapter concludes with, put a period to any further conference between the respective parties, and determined Sir Roger Manstock to take the very measure he had threatened to pursue. He immediately wrote a letter to his niece, explanatory of his sensations with respect to Henry, and beseeching her to excuse him from any trust that had relation to a person, who had caused him such uneasiness, and whom he was determined never to be connected with: he also informed her of the promise made to him by his daughter, and prayed her to send down a trusty person, properly authorized, into whose hands he might safely render back the packet she had entrusted to him: he then concluded, in the most conciliating terms that his tenderness could suggest, wishing her a return of health, and assuring her of his unalterable affection.

A servant was ordered to set off express with this letter, who had directions where to find the lady in town, if he did not overtake her on the road, of which, however, there was the greatest probability, as her daily stages were very short.
In the mean time our amiable heroine did not, like some others, dedicate every hour to sullen silence and continual melancholy; for though her private moments were sad enough, she had yet a smile for her father when they met, and the same eyes that showered tears in secret, reassumed their native cheerful lustre when her parent was in sight.
Not so the Reverend Mr. Claypole; there was something in his breast resembling those goads and stings which disappointed malice or ambition sometimes entertain themselves with in secret, in the way of penance for attempts which conscience does not quite approve of. He was indeed superior to that tergiversation and incertitude of purpose, which consciences over nice sometimes impose upon resolutions not over strong; for he was firmly resolved to turn his back upon his old friend, and his face towards his new one; but he could not quite persuade himself that such a resolve had all the

qualities of a virtuous purpose; for he could not but feel that he ought to be grateful to the one, and suspicious of the other. He had motives, however, and principles of action in his mind, which some soft souls in the world seem to know nothing of; amongst these, the gratification that his visit to Lord Crowbery would administer to his mind, as an insult to the patroness of Ratcliffe's living, was to him very pleasing on reflection. That his visit would be highly offensive to Sir Roger, and cut off his return for ever after to the house of Manstock, he clearly saw; but there was no loss could accrue from an exclusion, where he never wished more to be admitted. In fact, he saw how totally he was ruined in this family; and having no doubt that his niece had dealt the stab to Henry, he was not sorry to avail himself of the protection of Lord Crowbery, and the countenance, which his reception of her would give to her story, in opposition to all others; but what above all weighed with him for accepting the invitation was, the hope it held out to his ambition, upon the event of Lady Crowbery's death, if his niece would consent to govern herself by his advice.
Reasoning in this manner, he prepared for

his departure from the house of his friend; and this he did so secretly and expeditiously, that he stole his march, unknown to Sir Roger, leaving only the few following lines as his apology and adieu:—
Mr. Claypole leaves his respectful compliments to Sir Roger Manstock, with thanks for all favours: the duty which he owes to a much-injur'd orphan niece compels him to so hasty a departure, that time, conspiring with his own feelings, prevents him from taking leave in person of a friend, whom he has so long and justly held in honour.
An order was now dispatched from Sir Roger, directing Dame May to come to him at the Great House. This was instantly obeyed by the good woman, who was given to understand, in a few words, that her longer residence in the house, which Isabella had provided for her, would be very readily dispensed with. To this she immediately answered, that she would without delay prepare for her removal, having received an invitation from her daughter, who, by the blessing of Providence, was now in a condition to support her; she therefore begged

leave to return her humble thanks for the favours she had received, and would no longer be a burthen to his charity; she would be gone that very night, if Sir Roger wished it, and leave the few things she had in the house to follow her the next day. To this the Baronet shortly answered, that it was very well, and there the business would have closed, but that it occurred to him, as she was leaving the room, to put a question to her for curiosity's sake, respecting Fanny Claypole, which was simply this,—"If she understood or believed, that the stab in Henry's arm was given by her hand purposely and revengefully?" The poor woman was staggered with the abruptness of the question, and the stern manner in which it was put. She hesitated through fear and confusion; upon which, in an angry tone, Sir Roger told her, he had no wish to hear her answer, for he should put little faith in what anybody said, who was not always ready with a plain reply to a plain question, and with this rebuke waved his hand and dismissed her.
In relating this short scene as it passed, we are sensible that we must represent the character of the worthy Baronet in a harsher light than it has hitherto been seen; but in

extenuation we have to say, that he had impressions on his mind not favourable to this poor woman, and was also disturbed in temper at the present moment, by the valedictory note of his seceding friend Mr. Claypole, just before delivered into his hands. Under the same impression, he was meditating to give orders for dismantling the cottage of its furniture, when Isabella entered the room, upon which he thought proper to apprize her of his design, qualifying it with some introductory observations upon the jealousy, which such favours created in the parish, and the unsuitable elegance with which she had fitted the apartment: "With your leave, therefore," added he, "I shall give orders to have the furniture remov'd, and the cottage reduc'd to a condition better fitted to the poverty of the next inhabitants, whom charity may recommend to it." Isabella bowed her head in token of obedience, but felt the unkindness of this order in the most poignant manner; she recollected that she had been allowed to consider this little tenement as her own, and to carry on her works, both within doors and without, after her own simple but elegant fancy: the resumption of a fond gift, and the

reversal of all her little amusing operations, by a decree so peremptory and unexpected, struck deep into her heart, yet she commanded herself so far, when asked if she had any further use for the furniture, as to make answer with great mildness and submission, that there was nothing there she particularly wished to preserve, but a certain print, which she had hung up in the parlour, as a memorial of the donor, and the similitude of a face, which had ever been accustom'd to look upon her with the tenderest affection. "Pooh! pooh!" replied Sir Roger, "you have copies enough of that unhappy countenance, and I wou'd advise you to put this out of the way as speedily as you can, lest it shou'd sometime or other tell tales of what it has been a spectator of."—"I am answer'd, Sir," replied Isabella, "and with a reproach, which, if I am capable of deserving from you, I must be unfit any longer to remain in your presence."

So saying, she hid her face in her handkerchief, and hastened out of the room to give vent to her agony.



CHAPTER XI. A pious Mind resorts to Providence for its Support.
FEW moments had passed after Isabella left her father, before he felt as much pain from the asperity of the retort he had given, as she had experienced in receiving it. Nature could not be long expelled from his heart, nor could ill humour take any lasting possession of it. He wished he had not said it; he felt the cruelty, the injustice of wreaking vengeance on the harmless works of her fancy, and, perhaps, he would at this moment have not been sorry, could he have recalled the messenger he had dispatched to Lady Crowbery. Those sensations of regret, which a good mind is capable of, Sir Roger felt; but to confess and atone is the effort of a great mind as well as good, and that was not bestowed by nature upon him. Men, who affect the reputation of a decided character, are too apt to mistake obstinacy in error for consistency of opinion; and this was Sir

Roger's misfortune. Few things could have galled him more than Claypole's conduct, yet his whole life did not furnish so great an instance of weakness, as his pertinacious attachment to that unworthy friend. No hypocrisy is sooner discovered than the pretended generosity of a self-interested man, and opportunities enough had offered themselves to Sir Roger Manstock for developing the real character of Claypole; but the stronger the light was that struck upon him, so much the closer he shut his eyes against it. The veil was now drawn off at once, and prejudice could no longer save him from the conviction of his own mistake. This vexatious discovery was just rankling in his mind, when innocence, unfortunately falling in his way, was made to suffer (as too often happens) for the guilty, who had escaped his resentment.
The next morning brought over Susan May to Manstock House, who was admitted to her lovely mistress to pay her last duty, and take leave. On this occasion, she was led into a diffusive recital of all particulars respecting Henry's late generous proceeding, to which Isabella lent a willing ear. As the one recounted the noble acts of her benefactor, the

heart of the other glowed with delight; his virtues, his sufferings, his magnanimity, his self-denials were enumerated and acknowledged; when the subject of his mental perfections was exhausted, his person, his graceful form, the beauty of his countenance, became the topic of their praise, and on this subject Susan's eloquence seemed animated into warmer phrase and diction than on the former. Whilst this was going on, Isabella's blushes witnessed to the sensibility of soul, which this recital inspired; at last, no longer able to refrain from joining in the praise of one so dear to her, she said, "I perfectly agree with you in every thing you have said, or can say, in commendation of your amiable benefactor. I do not think it is in nature for any human being to be more noble in mind, more charming in person; and I feel no shame in confessing to you, what I have avow'd to my father, that in purity of soul I love him. But alas! alas! I have difficulties to encounter, objections to overcome, and sorrows to endure, that will probably make that a condition of necessity, which you may remember was once my choice, and devote me to a single life."—"Heaven in its mercy

forbid!" cried Susan, "that so much beauty and love shou'd be left to pine away in solitariness and disappointment; fathers must have hearts of marble, that can so controul and thwart the virtuous affections of their children."—"Hold," cried Isabella, "you must not talk in that stile, Susan, if you have any value for my friendship; my father must always be spoken of with respect in my hearing; we will therefore change the subject to what we cannot differ about, and you will tell me what you think of Henry's wound: Did he tell you how he came by it?" To this Susan replied, that he had been very reserved upon the subject; but, for her own part, she was certain it had been given him by that desperate creature Fanny Claypole, in the rage of disappointment; "which, indeed," added she, "her own confession puts out of doubt; for my mother told me in secrecy, that when she attended her in her fits and ravings, that and many other things came out, which are almost too bad to relate."—"I don't wish to hear them," replied Isabella, "for things of that sort are perfectly disgusting to me; and, I dare say, if any thing improper pass'd, she herself was in the fault of it."—"So much

I will venture to inform you of," said Susan, "that she was not in the fault that it did not pass; but the truth of the fact is, that the rage of the lady was rous'd by the virtue of the man, and the stab was given him in the fury of revenge and disappointment."—"That I can well believe," replied the blushing fair; "and I own to you, I am glad at my heart that Henry did not demean himself by stooping to her arts; but I wonder what is become of her." To this Susan answered, that she was now with the Lord of Crowbery Castle, where she was treated with great attention, and where she did not doubt but she was playing a very deep and cunning game, and the rather, as she understood that her reverend uncle had made one of the party, and was now upon a visit at the Castle.—"So soon after the departure of my cousin!" cried Isabella, sighing; "that is indeed extraordinary on his part. I understood he had left us, but I did not guess he was gone thither of all places; I am sure my father must have felt that affront very severely."—"I hope it will open his eyes," replied Susan, "for all the neighbours cry out upon Mr. Claypole already." Isabella made some slight observation

upon this, and here the conference ended.
Isabella, now alone, resigned herself to meditation, and after a few minutes so employed, broke out into the following soliloquy:—"Oh Henry! mysterious son of an unhappy mother, little does my father think how nearly thou art allied to him; and though I am now interdicted from all communication with thee, I will still nourish one spark of hope, that thy affection may prevail against appearances, and thou persist to love me, till time shall develope the secret which honour now forbids me to divulge, in spite of all temptations. May providence protect thee in all dangers, and by restoring thy beloved parent to health, crown thy filial undertaking with a happy event! meanwhile, though I will pray for thee in secret, I must remember the promise I have given to my father, and sacredly fulfil it in its strictest sense, without prevarication: this is my duty; but when I reflect what circumstances may occur to shake my constancy, and overpower my nature, I tremble at the task I have engag'd in. Where then shall I find fortitude in the hour of trial, and whither shall I resort, but

to thee, O thou, who art the father of all those that faithfully refer themselves to thy protection? take then, I pray thee, into thy most gracious disposal, my heart and its purposes, too weak without thy strengthening providence, too fallible without thy merciful support."


END OF THE EIGHTH BOOK.



BOOK THE NINTH.

CHAPTER I. A short Interlude between the Acts.
WHILST the dramatic author cheers his audience with a tune between the acts, I am forced to fill up my intervals with a treatise, and (what is still worse) with a treatise of my own making, which is not quite the case with his tune. His spectators are regaled with harmony in a brilliant theatre, amidst a blaze of lights; my reader, in his solitary chair, sits moping over the dull strain of an uninteresting dissertation, which probably has little other merit but of putting him to sleep: what inspires his critics with good humour, only stupifies mine.
But if these are his advantages in the periods of suspension, many more and much greater are they, when he returns to the stage and I to my history. The actor before the curtain and the scenist behind it conspire to lift him into fame, almost without any effort of his

own: he is upheld by the charms of spectacle, I am loaded with the drudgery of detail; he has castles in the clouds, that drop down at the word of command, we are forced to labour late and early, till our brains are well nigh beaten into brick and mortar with the slavery of building them. A nimble scene-painter will dash off a cataract in full froth and foam, that will cost us twenty pages of hard pumping, before we can get a single drop to flow: how many pens do we split in conjuring up a storm of thunder and lightning, whilst he, by one mark in the margin of his manuscript, sets all the elements in a roar; we find it a very troublesome job to furnish horses and carriages for the conveyance of our company, his characters are wafted from scene to scene by a whistle; when his heroine is in a crisis, some one cries,—Hah! she faints!—and the inimitable Siddons dies away; another cries,—Hah! she revives!—the inimitable Siddons is alive again. We cannot do this without salts and hartshorn at the least, and in an obstinate sit, hardly with the help of burnt feathers, an unsavoury experiment he is never driven to.
Let us put the case, that the author of a

novel shall lay his scene in the house of some abandoned strumpet, where a set of cutthroats resort for the plotting of some murderous conspiracy, and let the hero of his story, for whom our pity is to be interested, enlist himself in this gang, and let him introduce a virtuous wife, the darling of his heart, and the faithful partner of his bed, into this house of ill-fame and assembly of villains, there to be left in the hands of these miscreants as a hostage for his good faith, telling her withal, that he is sworn to assassinate her father that very night, who but would cry out against the conduct of such a fable? but let Otway's fascinating muse put this into melodious metre, let the bell toll for execution, bring forth the rack, send the actress on the stage with hair dishevelled, cheeks of chalk, and eyes wildly staring—no matter why so mad at once, nor what she talks of, (be it of seas of milk or ships of amber)—all hearts bow down to her resistless energy; she takes her poet on her wings, and soars to fame.
Wonderful in all ages, and honoured by all enlightened nations, hath been the actor's magic art; the theatres and forums of Greece were embellished with his statues; they gazed

upon him like a descended god; their greatest poets, down to Aeschylus and Aristophanes, trod the stage in person: Rome also honoured her actors, and they in return were the grace and ornament of all societies; their sayings were recorded, and collections of their apothegms have come down to our times; Caesar in all his power made suite to them, and even knights of Rome did not revolt from the profession. It remained for modern times to complete their triumphs, by admitting female candidates into the lists; from that moment Nature took possession of her rights; the finest feelings were consigned to the fairest forms; the very Muse herself appeared in her own sex and person: beauty, that gives being to the poet's rapturous vision, a voice that guides his language to the heart, smiles that enchant, tears that dissolve us, with looks that fascinate, and dying plaintive tones that sink into the soul, are now the appropriate and exclusive attributes of that all-conquering sex; in short, they bind our nobles in chains, and our princes in links—of love.



CHAPTER II. An Adventure on board a Frigate.
WE now return to our hero, who, with fair weather and favouring gales, was far advanced upon his voyage. A few, and but slight sensations of uneasiness had attended his initiation on ship-board. Cary's gay and gallant spirit cheered him at all moments; the novelty of the scene, the succession of adventures which occurred to him in passing through the Channel, and the striking characters of British seamen, for ever in his view, were to a mind like his most interesting contemplations. The cleanliness, good order, and discipline of Cary's frigate were exemplary; and as she had cleared the Channel, and was upon the sharp look-out for an enemy, expectation kept every body alert, and in a state of warlike preparation.
Tom Weevil was a lively thoughtless fellow, and had passed through all the discipline of being seized up to the shrouds, and every other species of sea-jokes practised upon fresh-water novices, with perfect good-humour. He had

made acquaintance with several gentlemen of easy address, particularly in the foretop, with the captain of which, Jack Jones by name, he had established a sworn friendship; and as Tom was very fond of taking the air on that elevated station where Jack presided, he was mostly to be found in the aforesaid top, where, in leisure hours, he edified his company with reading (a gift which he alone possessed) the illustrious history of Robinson Crusoe, to which all ears were open, and universal faith from all parties subscribed without reserve. Happy would it be for congregations in general were they so attentive to their preacher as Tom's audience were to him: they were also able commentators upon many parts of the work; but as they did not always concur in the same explanations and remarks, the progress of the history was liable to considerable interruptions and chasms, whilst the interlocutory parts were filled up with oaths and lies, given and taken very liberally in the true spirit of controversy.
Mr. William Williams, the surgeon (or, in the sea phrase, the doctor) had so ably conducted the cure of Henry's wound, by adding nothing to nature's operations but cleanliness

and fresh lint, that his arm was come to its perfect use, and, it may be presumed, his spirit was not unwilling to try its strength upon the enemies of his country, if they came in his way. It was now early morning, and that wished-for opportunity was in near approach: Henry was on deck, enjoying that most magnificent of all spectacles, the sun rising over the waters, a rayless globe of fire; his heart expanded at the sight, and his thoughts ascended towards the Creator of those wonders he contemplated. Captain Cary was at present under easy sail, and the weather fine, when the man at the mast-head descried a sail a-head: instantly the officer on watch informed the Captain, who, leaping out of his cot, huddled on his clothes, and in little more time than a lion would bestow upon his toilet, presented himself on the quarter-deck, having ordered all hands up, and sail to be made. A very little time discovered her to be a square-rigged vessel, and as she kept her course towards Cary, with the wind in her favour, she was soon visible from the deck, where every glass in the ship was directed towards her, and every voice pronounced her to be a frigate of equal or superior force to their own; and, upon a nearer

view, from certain marks, which experienced seamen are quick in discerning, she was adjudged, without one dissenting voice, to be an enemy, and an enemy, it should seem, that did not decline an action.
Now began that aweful arrangement in which silence still as death prevailed, and every thing moved at the word of one man, whose voice, and none other, was heard, and to whose command absolute obedience followed on the instant. Henry surveyed the whole with silent awe, and reverence for a service so conducted: his heart glowed with love and pride for his friend, whom situation seemed now to have transformed into a new creature; that countenance, which hitherto he had only seen charactered with the mirthful smile of raillery and frolic, was now terrible and frowning, as he bent his eye upon the enemy, in the same act of preparation with himself. He was a perfect hero arming for battle, courage tempered with deliberate circumspection marked every word he said, which were distinctly and precisely given out in orders to every officer in the ship; the lieutenants repaired to their quarters, the men assembled in the tops, and honest Weevil was honoured

with a post at one of the cabin-guns, in company with eight other brave fellows. Cary, having hoisted his colours, addressed himself to his men in a short but animating speech, that in language suited to their habits and apprehensions gave them to understand, that whilst he had breath in his body those colours were never to come down; that the advantage of the few guns the enemy had over them was to be compensated by superior skill and courage, and he was resolved that republican frigate should either follow him into a British port or sink alongside of him. This was followed by three cheers; when, turning to Henry, he said, "Now, my brave Henry, if you like the sport, we will give you a taste of it; this fellow seems to have some stomach for fighting, but no great management in bringing it to bear: I see he means to fight us on the starboard side, and has arm'd himself accordingly; but I shall baulk his fancy, and take him where he is not prepar'd." This said, he gave the word, helm-a-weather, and by a rapid manoeuvre well executed, brought his frigate on the other side, pouring in a raking fire as he sheered across him. This manoeuvre produced much

confusion and some loss to the enemy, who are in the practice of arming only on one side. The position Cary had taken, and the rapidity of his fire, had great effect, as the action was close. When the enemy had recovered from his surprise, his behaviour was perfectly gallant; and by something giving way on board the British frigate, she became unmanageable, and fell broadside to upon the Frenchman; part of the crew being occupied in repairing this accident, the enemy seized the opportunity for boarding, being full of men. Henry now felt his spirit called upon in a manner not to be resisted; a confused and scrambling fight took place upon the gang-way, where the French had lodged themselves in some numbers, under conduct of a spirited officer, whom Henry immediately singled out as his man; he flew to the scene of action sword in hand, shouting to the people as he advanced, and at the very first stroke brought down the leader of the boarding crew, who fell dead into the waste. Animated by his example, the defendants became invincible, and repulse and slaughter ensued: the few that escaped back to their ship were instantly followed by the victorious party, Henry being

one of the first, if not the very first, that leapt on board the national frigate; there was no leader like him to rally the fugitives; in the first fury of the onset the carnage was indiscriminate, till a general cry for quarter recalled that mercy which is never long absent from the hearts of our countrymen, and stopt the hand of death. The colours were hauled down, and three cheers from the conquerors gave notice to their gallant captain and comrades alongside of them, that they were in possession of their prize. A crowd gathered round Henry, who, like Achilles bathed in the blood of Hector, stood in the midst of them tremendously beautiful: he had thrown off his coat before he entered into action, his hat had been beaten off, and his hair, Medusa like, fell in wild disorder on his forehead, his eyes seemed on fire, the frown yet dwelt upon his brow, and the angry spot of crimson hue still burnt upon his cheek. A confusion of voices now arose, all applauding their young volunteer, with many huggings, and squeezings, and slappings on the back, garnished with oaths of the most unaccountable variety, which, through an excess of good-will, blasted every limb in the company, and sent our hero himself

to the devil by a thousand different conveyances. Amongst these vociferous admirers his eye singled out a figure in the outward row, whom he discovered to be his friend Tom Weevil, in spite of a small alteration in his countenance, occasioned by the removal of one ear and part of a cheek out of their place, and dangling upon his shoulder by the help of certain fibres which still restrained them from total separation. Henry flew to his wounded friend, compressed the fleshy fragments into their place as well as he could, and taking off his neckcloth, bound them up, and hurried him away to Doctor Williams, whom he found in the cockpit stript to his shirt, with his sleeves rolled up to his shoulders, and bathed in a mingled stream of blood and sweat. "When you can turn your hand," cried Henry, "to a brave lad, who wants a little of your art, I shall be oblig'd to you." A foretop man, one of Weevil's audience, was then under Williams's hands, who seemed in a most hopeless case. "It's all up with me," cried the dying sailor; "death has stopt my grog for everlasting; therefore, do you see, Doctor, never break your head about me, but turn your hand to the lad, splice his chops, and send him

going." The heroism of this expiring warrior, the scene of human misery which the cockpit presented, and the gory figure of Williams himself, were too much for the unhardened nerves of Henry—the tears started from his eyes. The dying man was still anxious for the glory of his country, and demanded to know what had been the event of the fight. When Henry had informed him of this, life seemed to reinspire his half-closed eyes, a gleam of joy fleeted over his distorted visage; "Oh! that I cou'd have one peep at the prize," he exclaimed, "before my daylights are out."—"So thou shalt," exclaimed Jack Jones, who was standing over him, "if the brave volunteer will condescend to bear a hand."—"If I was an admiral," replied our hero, "I shou'd be honour'd by the office;" and having so said, taking up one end of the hammock on which the dying man was stretched, and Jones taking the other, they carried him up the ladder, and placed him where, with the prize in his view, he breathed out his gallant spirit in the arms of victory.



CHAPTER III. Our Hero makes an interesting Discovery.
WHEN our hero had performed the last offices to the dying sailor, he went upon the quarter-deck, where Captain Cary was busily occupied in giving orders upon various matters. The first moment he could detach himself from business, he ran to Henry, and throwing his arms about him, overwhelmed him with applauses: great was their mutual joy to find that neither had received the slightest hurt; but what a change did it appear to Henry, as he cast his eyes about the frigate, late in such beautiful and perfect trim, now exhibiting nothing but a pent-house of dangling rags and mangled rigging overhead, and below, a chaos of broken booms, shattered boats, and decks floated with water black as Styx with the scattering of the powder. When Cary had devoted a few moments to his gallant friend, he called the first lieutenant to him, and shaking him cordially by the hand, gave him joy of his prize; "Go, my brave fellow," he cried, "and take possession

of that noble frigate, which your valour and good conduct has contributed to conquer; and you, volunteer," added he, addressing himself to Henry, "go with your officer, and board her for the second time; but here," pointing to his coat, that laid under the barricade, "slip on your clothes, and get a hat." He then gave directions for shifting the prisoners, and that proper care should be had of the wounded men, by superintending the treatment they received from their own surgeons: and now began the carpenter's and boatswain's reports, with a long train of various duties, that fall to the share of every one in Cary's situation, and which none were better qualified to execute than he was.
When the first lieutenant, accompanied by our hero, came on board the prize, he found the crew and passengers of a Lisbon packet, which she had captured in her cruize, and of these he bade Henry take charge, whilst he gave attention to more pressing matters. Henry, now acting under orders, immediately began to exert his delegated authority, by assembling his countrymen from all parts of the vessel, for the joyful purpose of restoring them to their liberty. When he was about to embark them in the

boat, that waited to receive them, under the command of Lord Frederick, our young midshipman heretofore described, one of the company informed him, there was a sick gentleman in his hammock below, whose state of health required instant attention. To this person Henry immediately went, with one of the party for a guide, who brought him to the cable-tier, where the sick gentleman was lying in his hammock, attended by two servants. When our hero had imparted to him the cheering purpose of his visit, and recommended a speedy removal on board the British frigate, where he would be better accommodated, he answered, in a faint tone, that it would be a most welcome release; he had been tortured with noise and clamour, and, at the same time, nearly suffocated with heat and stench; "but surely," added he, "I have heard that voice before, tho' I cannot discern your countenance in this dark place. Is it possible, Sir, that you and I can have met at Crowbery?" A short explanation now took place, which, to Henry's great and joyful surprise, convinced him that Providence had directed him to the rescue of his father. Difficult though it was to suppress his emotion

on such a discovery, yet he had command enough over himself to check his tongue, and immediately began his operations for removing him from his loathsome abode, all which he planned and executed with the tenderest care and attention. The refreshing sensation of air and motion revived the spirits of the redeemed prisoner; he was lifted into the boat in his bedding; Henry's eye watched every movement that could annoy him, Henry's arm supported him through every moment of the passage, and his care superintended the operation of getting him on board, where he instantly assigned him his own cot, and recommended him, in the strongest terms, to his friend Williams.
So reformed was the appearance of Cary's frigate, that it appeared to Henry as the work of magic; but what cannot British seamen, well commanded, perform? She was now once more in sailing trim, her decks washed, and her lumber stowed away. Henry delivered up his redeemed prisoners, with a list of their names, to the captain; and, having executed these instructions, demanded if there were any further commands for him? "Nothing,

at present, but to refresh yourself in the cabin," replied Cary, "where you will find cold meat and wine, and some of the national officers at work upon it." Thither our exhausted hero eagerly repaired; and, as he was mixing with the prisoners, he heard one of them relating a circumstance of an English deserter, who, being mutinous at his gun in the time of action, and refusing to serve it against his countrymen, had been run through the back by one of the officers on the spot. This was told in French, which Henry had enough of the language to understand, and, in the same language, made shift to enquire the name of the renegado. This the Frenchman did not know; but he learnt enough of his station and description in the ship to guide him in the enquiries which his humanity towards a fellow-creature, under such circumstances, inspired him to make. He therefore snatched a hasty morsel, took a refreshing draught of wine, and jumped into the boat, that was just then going off to the prize. Here he soon traced his enquiries to the wretched object he was in search of, and in whom there appeared so much to pity and condemn. He found him stretched at

his length upon the bare deck, beside the gun he had been posted at, incapable of raising himself up, floated with his own blood, and at the point of death. Judge, reader, what was Henry's sensation, when, in this expiring wretch, he recognized the features of his acquaintance Bowsey. "Ah! miserable man," he cried, "is this your fate at last? Do you not know me? Speak to me, if you have strength to utter; look on me, if you can lift your eyes, and I will yet give you the last comfort of knowing that your victim, Thomas Weevil, survives the blow you dealt him."—"Good Lord, good Lord," murmured the expiring man; "Weevil is alive, then I am no murderer: I know you, Mr. Henry; you are a good man; I wish I had taken your good counsel, then I had never been in these damn'd fellows' hands; I am dying, I am dying; I wou'd not fight against my country; tho' bad enough in all reason, I was not such a shabby rascal as that came to, so a scoundrel thrust his sword into my back, (the devil reward him for it!) and here I've lain ever since." Henry saw the agonies of death upon him; he grew convulsed at times, then brought out a few words, and seemed struggling to reach out

his hand, which Henry no sooner perceived, than stooping down, he took him by the hand, saying, "Farewel, the Lord have mercy upon you and forgive you." This was understood by Bowsey, who, deeply groaning, muttered something, of which Henry could make out no more than, Sleep, sleep—they say it is all sleep.—"They are liars and blasphemers," exclaimed Henry, and was proceeding, when he perceived the senses he addressed were closed, the last breath was spent, and the soul had taken flight to those unknown regions, where all who credit or inculcate these impious doctrines, will be destined to experience a terrible confutation of their eternal sleep.



CHAPTER IV. First Love strikes deep.
WHEN Captain Cary had taken into consideration the state of his prize, (a large forty gun frigate) the number of his prisoners, and various other circumstances, which made a separation unadviseable, he determined to avail himself of a fair wind, and his proximity to the coast, for convoying her

into the first English port he cou'd make, though his own destination was for the Tagus; he therefore made known this his resolution to his officers in each ship, and steered for the channel; the wind continued to serve, and he pushed into Falmouth, as the first port that was favourable to his purpose.
Here Henry landed with his father, who still concealed himself under the name of Smith. The ships took the first occasion for proceeding to Plymouth, where they could receive the necessary repair, whilst Henry staid with his two convalescents at Falmouth, for Tom Weevil's wound was now, by Williams's skill, far advanced towards a cure. The last conversation that Henry held with Williams was on the evening preceding the departure of the ships, when with some difficulty he prevailed upon him to accept a suitable present for his great attention to his own and Weevil's wounds: Mr. Smith, so called, had rewarded him in a more magnificent stile, according to the customs of the East. In this conversation Williams, whose modesty had seldom permitted him to speak of himself and his own adventures, was enticed into a more circumstantial detail of past occurrences, which it

imports not this history to record in any other period, than that in which he was employed as an assistant to our acquaintance Zachary Cawdle at Crowbery, where the youthful charms of Susan May, then in their first blossom, made sad havock with Williams's susceptible heart. It did not appear, even from his own modest account, that Susan was altogether inexorable, for Williams was a very handsome fellow, with a thousand good qualities, and, over all, one of the sweetest tempers man ever possessed, but there were rubs innumerable, which fortune perversely threw in the way of his passion that Williams had not skill or confidence to struggle with: the chief of these had root in Jemima's jealousy and spite, some sprung from honest Zachary himself, who thought love no great recommendation in a compounder of medicines; and others were thrown in his way by the collusion of Blachford with Dame Jemima, the bright eyes of the damsel having set fire to the bilious particles of the Justice's blood in no less degree than to the milky ones of Williams. To extricate himself from this dilemma by deliberate means required more nerves than Williams had to spare, he therefore

took quicker but less regular measures, and fairly escaped by flight, taking nothing away with him but an aching heart, and defrauding his master of no one tittle of his right, save only of the pleasure of paying him certain running arrears of wages, which Williams probably had neither time nor inclination to demand.
When Williams had concluded his narrative, Henry resolved first to try the pulse of his affection, before he threw the lure of Susan's fortune in his way, and this he rightly conceived to be the most honourable proceeding to both parties. He therefore began to discourse with him in such a way as might best discover how far Susan still kept any hold upon the heart of her first lover, and when this was made clear to him, he proceeded to unfold the dark transaction which Blachford had been concerned in, and the consequences it had produced. Here Williams, no longer able to restrain himself, broke out into violent denunciations against her betrayer, taking Heaven to witness, that whenever opportunity should serve, he would have his revenge upon him for what he had done; but this Henry soon put a stop to, by informing

him how completely the offender was now out of his reach. "It is an exit too good for such a villain," cried Williams, "he shou'd have died by the halter, or, if the law cou'd not have reach'd him, my arm shou'd; but though his life is out of my reach, his memory is not, and I will vindicate the innocent against the guilty, by making public the truth, and sharing my last shilling in support of my poor girl, wherever she can be found, and to whatever situation she may be reduc'd."—"That is a resolution," said Henry, "every way worthy of you, and bespeaks a generous soul; it also convinces me that you lov'd her honourably, and esteem'd her worthy of your love."—"And she is worthy still," rejoined he. "Can I love her less because she has suffer'd wrong and violence from the blackest wretch that ever breath'd? No, I shou'd be base as he is if I cou'd; but I am impatient to know what has been her fate, and how she has struggled under misery so complicated." This drew out that account, which no relater but one of Henry's delicacy of sentiment would have reserved for the conclusion of his story; and though it may be well believed the facts now recounted were not

embellished with any self-encomiums, yet the coldest colour he could give to truth could not prevent his hearer from receiving it with transports of admiration and gratitude.—"Oh Heavens!" cried Williams, "what a soul is yours? And have you risqued a life so precious in a voluntary combat with those madmen? God be prais'd, the villains have not drawn one drop of blood from your veins! well might we conquer, who were headed by an angel."—"Stop," cried Henry; "we will talk common sense, if you please, and treat each other like rational creatures. I have been telling you mere matter of fact, and as you seem to take a warm share in our friend Susan's interest, so far my story has repaid you for the pains it gave you in some parts, by the pleasure you receive in the conclusion of it. When your duty permits, and your inclination disposes you to make a trip to Crowbery, you will find your old acquaintance respectably establish'd; and if you see her with my eyes, and judge of her as I think you must, I persuade myself you will find no one charm of person, or good quality of heart, impair'd by what has pass'd since you lost sight of her: and now a thought strikes me,

Mr. Williams, as a hint for you to turn in your mind, which is simply this; your old friend Zachary Cawdle is now from home upon a service, which, I have reason to believe, will set him free from business for the rest of his days; shou'd this be the case, and if you prefer a stationary employ to a roving one like your present, it is not improbable but means may be taken for settling you in his business, if the spot is agreeable to you, and the object worth your thoughts." To this Williams answered, that the situation indeed would be very desirable; but he doubted his capacity of obtaining it, for he had no money, nor was in the way of getting any.—"Then I perceive," quoth Henry, "my good friend, you have no present thoughts of marrying." Williams blushed and was silent. Henry smiled, and shaking him by the hand, bade him be of good courage, telling him that it was probable he should have an opportunity of talking with Zachary before long, and that he would find means to inform him of the result of their conversation.



CHAPTER V. Our Hero quits the Sea.
THE next day Captain Cary took his departure for Plymouth, carrying his prize with him. Some time would be necessary for repairing the damages his frigate had received in the action, and this determined Henry to stay at Falmouth, not only for the purpose of attending upon his father, but in the hope of hearing some tidings of Lady Crowbery, whose arrival might now be looked for from day to day. Mr. Smith had taken lodgings in a private house, and was recovering his strength apace: to him Henry repaired, after his conversation with Williams above related, and found a chaise waiting at his door for a morning airing. His tender attentions had so won the heart of his unconscious father, that he seemed to live only in his company, and as this airing was a first effort, Henry offered to attend upon him in the carriage, which was most thankfully accepted. The driver was directed to chuse

the smoothest road, and go gently along; the sick man's spirits were revived by the air and motion, and now for the first time he found strength to converse more at large, than as yet he had been able to do.—"Your goodness to me, dear sir," said he, "has been such as I can never find words to express my sense of: I have hitherto been silent, not through want of gratitude but want of powers to give utterance to it; yet I have much to say to you, some things to explain, and others to apologize for. In the first place I shou'd tell you, that in all our casual rencounters, since the first time we met, when I pretended to have pick'd up a ring of Lady Crowbery's, I have been imposing myself upon you under a feign'd name and character: I am the third son now living of the Lord Pendennis, my name Henry Delapoer; a very early attachment to the loveliest of her sex being most unfortunately traversed by her father decided my fate, and hurried me to the East Indies, with a broken heart, upon a desperate adventure. It was the will of providence I shou'd survive my loss of happiness, by turning aside from me in various ways, almost miraculous, that death which I presumptuously courted.

As my heart never varied from its first affection, I never have had a thought of marrying; and though I have been little studious of accumulating money, yet circumstances, unsought for on my part, have thrown a fortune upon me, which, though not to be compar'd with many, is an affluent one, and, which is better, fairly earn'd, without cruelty or extortion. Having now disclos'd to you who I am, I shall next inform you of my purpose in setting out for Lisbon, in which undertaking I suspect it will be found that we have both the same object, namely, that of tendering our last melancholy offices to the much injured lady of that execrable tyrant Crowbery; of your motives, my dear Sir, I know no more than common report has given out, and they do credit to your gratitude, for I have heard she has been a beneficent and kind friend to you, and I cannot doubt but she has acted on the purest principles; how it comes to pass that I am so affected by her situation, and enrag'd against her oppressor, a single word will explain, when I tell you she was all but my wedded wife, when her inexorable father overtook us, in the last stage of our progress towards Gretna Green, and obstinately sever'd

that knot which a very few hours wou'd have made indissoluble. Merciful Heaven! what a heart-rending moment was that, which tore me from the arms of my Cecilia! Oh! Sir, it was attended with such aggravating horrors! Figure to yourself the circumstance most killing to the heart of honour, and that case was our's. What might have been the result of it I can well conceive; what it was Heaven only knows; for I was hurried out of England, and remain'd in ignorance of her fate; and now I find her wedded to a brute, childless, unhappy, and alas! far gone in a decay. If providence shall graciously permit her to survive her voyage, Lisbon gives me one last chance of meeting her on this side Heaven; if not, the short remnant of days that may be left to me shall be spent in bewailing her loss, and, if opportunity can be found, in avenging her wrongs."

Here the father ceased, exhausted not less by the agitation of his mind, than by the exertion of his discourse; a short silence took place, which Henry was too considerate of his repose to interrupt; at length perceiving that he expected a reply, he spoke as follows,—"I am greatly honour'd by the confidence

you repose in me, and it gives me the highest satisfaction to know, that my small services have been useful to you in any degree: I was certainly well prepared for the discovery you have been pleas'd to make, for it has long been out of doubt with me, that your first assum'd condition was not your real one; the manners, character, and deportment of a man of birth and education cannot easily be disguis'd, and your's least of all. I am not totally uninformed of Lady Crowbery's early attachment to the honourable Captain Delapoer, my life from infancy to a period not long pass'd having been spent under the care and tuition of a most intimate friend of her's, the Reverend Mr. Ratcliffe, lately deceas'd; by that excellent man I was receiv'd as a deserted nameless infant, deposited at his door, and recommended to his benevolent protection by my mysterious mother. Through some secret channel, unknown to me, the charges of my maintenance were supplied, when at his death they stopt at once, and I was thrown friendless and helpless on the world at large. Misfortunes, which at some other time I will detail to you, fell upon me, pressing me down to the extremity of human

misery and distress; in this state the charity of Lady Crowbery found me; her bounty to me drew the malice of her tyrant into open acts of oppression, loading her with calumny most gross and injurious, and racking her too sensitive feelings, till her tender frame gave way, and sunk under the attack; it is to me, therefore, belongs the punishment of that monster, for it is I who have been made the plea and apology for his abominable cruelty. Her death, which Heaven avert, wou'd set my hands at liberty, and as I have an auspicious impression on my mind that time will shortly reveal the present mystery of my birth, I may then be in possession of a name cowardice cannot shrink from; and when his pride can no longer shelter itself in the obscurity of my person, his cunning will no longer be able to evade the terror of my appeal. Here then you see the motives of my journey to Lisbon, and rightly suggest that they are in some respects congenial with your own. Undiminished affection on your part, and ardent gratitude on mine, attract us to the same point; and this being the case, I shou'd humbly conceive it will be our mutual wish to wait her arrival in this port, and, if she has no objection,

to embark with her in the same packet, if your health serves for the undertaking."


"You speak my wishes correctly," replied the father; "and as for my health, it is so secondary an object, compared to her's, that I do not suffer it to occupy a single thought." As these words were uttering, a chaise came in sight, followed by another, and by two servants on horseback. Henry started at the sight, and exclaimed, "My God! here is the very lady herself." Then calling to the postillion to stop, he hastily opened the door of the chaise, and leaping out, planted himself by the side of the road, which it was necessary for the approaching carriages to take.
Henry, though greatly agitated, was not wanting in sufficient presence of mind to be cautious in his mode of stopping Lady Crowbery's carriage, which he did as gently and as silently as he could contrive. When he presented himself at the window, the exhausted traveller had raised herself up to enquire into the cause of the stop, when immediately as her eyes lighted on the face of her son, the blood rushed into her faded cheeks, and she exclaimed—"My Henry! my Henry! is it possible?" and was proceeding; when, to save her from unseasonable

exertions, he told his story in as few words as possible, omitting for the present the circumstance of his meeting with his father, who remained in his chaise, drawn out of the road at some distance.
He had taken the precaution to secure her quiet apartments in a private house, and having directed her drivers to follow his chaise, he left her, and returned to his father, whom he found in great agitation of spirits. It was agreed between them that Henry should prepare Lady Crowbery, before Mr. Delapoer attempted to see her; and as soon therefore as he had entered the town he quitted the chaise, and conducted Lady Crowbery's people to the door of the house he had taken for her.
Here she alighted, and between Henry and Doctor Cawdle was conducted to her apartment, which, presenting her with a fine view of the sea, and being both in point of aspect and interior accommodations much to her liking, seemed to have the effect of reviving her spirits, exhilarated no doubt by the sight, above all others, of her beloved Henry.
Honest Zachary, little less delighted than his patient at this unexpected meeting, now

let out the circumstance, hitherto suppressed by Henry, of the action Cary had had, which he had picked up by report upon the road, but prudently forbore to speak of. This forced our hero upon a narrative of the whole affair, in which he took not the glory to himself that was due, but in all other particulars was a very correct relater of facts. Zachary now began his journal, and travelled very circumstantially from London to Falmouth, commenting upon his own sagacious proceedings by the way, to which he very justly ascribed the success that had hitherto crowned his operations; and certain it was, the health and strength of the lady did not appear, to Henry's observation, to have suffered much, if any, diminution by the journey. A restorative was now administered, on which Zachary descanted with much learning, and at the same time pronounced, that a repose of some days would be indispensible for her Ladyship's safety, before she embarked on board the packet. A fresh supply of certain drugs being wanted, he sallied forth in search of a proper shop, from whence to replenish his stock. As soon as he was gone, the mother being left with her son, threw her arms about his neck,

and gave full vent to those exquisite sensations which nature and affection, hitherto repressed, had implanted in her soul. Moments so free and mutually delicious they had never yet enjoyed; they exchanged embraces and mingled tears, till Henry, recollecting that even joy may be too violent, gently extricated himself from her embrace, rose from her feet where he was kneeling, and having seated himself at her side, clasping one of her hands in his, she began a conversation, which will be recorded in the following chapter.


CHAPTER VI. Friends long divided meet at last.

"I HAVE receiv'd a letter," said the Lady Crowbery, "from my uncle Manstock, which occasion'd me to make a longer stay in London than I should else have made; it obliged me to send down my lawyer, to receive from his hands the packet containing my will and other papers, which I had deposited with him. What particular reasons he had for declining a trust, that he had willingly

accepted, is matter of conjecture only; but I suppose they proceed from some suspicion entertain'd of your attachment to Isabella, and her's to you, for which he is probably indebted to the kind suggestions of his friend Mr. Claypole, from whose resentment, upon being refus'd the living of our lamented Ratcliffe, I have every thing malicious to expect. If, then, my uncle will surrender up his understanding to that unworthy guide, can I help it? I have appointed my executor, and shall put into your hands a copy of my will, with full directions where to apply for the original, which I have lodg'd with Mr. G—, of Gray's Inn, a man in whose integrity the most sacred trust may be repos'd. But how far this change of opinion in Sir Roger Manstock may affect his amiable daughter is a question of very serious concern; for, if I understand his letter rightly, you are put under absolute proscription; nor do I expect she will be allow'd to correspond with me, unless my letters are submitted to inspection before they reach her hands; and as for her writing to me, I do not suppose she will be suffer'd to do it on any account; you see, therefore, in what light you stand; and, according

to your own feelings, must either prepare yourself for mortification and disappointment, if you persist in thinking of her; or, if you can let your judgment over-rule your passion, you will divert your thoughts from a pursuit that now seems hopeless; for to attempt at detaching Isabella from the strict observance of her father's commands is an undertaking as impracticable as it wou'd be dishonourable."


"That is an attempt," replied Henry; "I shall never make; for that wou'd be to ruin myself both in her esteem and my own. Interdicted by her father, I am excluded from all hope; at the same time, if I know my own heart, I know that time can work no change in its affections; and if I am totally to despair of Isabella, so long as it shall please Heaven to impose upon a wretched creature life bereft of all happiness, so long I shall, with all the resignation that becomes me, endure the dispensation; for it is not my nature to rebel against my Creator."


"I perceive," said the mother, "that your love, my dear Henry, lies deep, and is immoveable; hasty passions waste themselves in vehement asseverations; the flame burns

out, and there's an end to them, but your's is fixt deliberate approbation, therefore I shall not argue against it; on the contrary, I must confess to you, that before I parted from Isabella, I confided to her the secret of your birth; I own'd myself your mother, and disclos'd to her the whole purport of those papers, which I deposited with her father, to be opened only on the event of my decease. She knows you, therefore, for the son of Delapoer, the heir of my estate, and, perhaps, of his fortune, if he has returned, as I am inform'd, without connections, and in affluent circumstances. In her heart, therefore, I shou'd flatter myself you will keep your place, unless my uncle shou'd extort from her any promise to your absolute exclusion. In the mean time, I cou'd wish, before I die, to obtain, if possible, an interview with your father, who is unconscious of your existence, and which might have taken place but for the provoking oversight of honest Cawdle, who forgot to give you my note with the ring. Whilst I was in London, I caus'd enquiry to be made after Delapoer; I was inform'd he remained unmarried, had preserv'd an excellent character, and brought home a respectable

fortune, very honourably acquir'd; he was not in town, nor was it exactly known where he was gone, for he had neither house nor servants in London, and the report was, that he was going out of England for the winter, to a warmer climate. It occurs to me, therefore, that if he has heard of my being order'd to Lisbon, he may possibly make that his point."


"And shou'd you be well pleas'd if it was so?" demanded Henry.—"I confess to you, I shou'd not be sorry," replied the lady, "for the reasons I have already stated."—"Then I may venture to inform you," said Henry, "that he was with me in the chaise when I met you on the road." At these words the blood rushed into the cheeks of the feeble invalid, her eyes sparkled with joy, and she exclaimed with unusual energy, "How wonderful are the ways of Providence! What an unexpected blessing, that I am now permitted to be a happy instrument of a discovery like this! Let me see him without loss of time; let me not postpone, even for an hour, a duty so important, an opportunity so graciously offered. I take for granted, you have not declared yourself to him." He assured her he had

not. "Then run for him," she cried; "bring him to me this instant; nature struggles at my heart, and will not be restrain'd."

Henry was gone whilst the words were on her lips: she immediately gave orders to her servants to prevent interruption, and then began to collect her thoughts for the awful interview. Whilst she reflected on the extraordinary combination of events that had brought about this unexpected meeting, it inspired her to hope, that Heaven had sealed her pardon for the past offences of her youth, and brought her sufferings to a period. When she endeavoured to put her thoughts into some form of words, and prepare for the discovery she had to make, she found herself incapable of arranging her ideas, and gave up the attempt. "It is in vain," she cried, "to meditate on what I am to say; I must leave it to nature and the impulse of the moment." And now the voice of Henry in the house warned her of his approach; and soon she heard the steps of two men upon the stairs; when the door being opened, presented to her view the sickly and emaciated form of Delapoer, leaning on the arm of his conductor, trembling as he advanced towards her, and panting for breath

through faintness and agitation. Henry instantly retired: not a word was uttered by either of the parties; she made an effort to raise herself from her seat, but sunk back, and, putting her hands before her face, burst into tears. There was a chair beside her, in which Delapoer sate down. "How shall I express my thanks to you," he said, after a short pause, "for this indulgence? Providence seems to have brought us together, by the most extraordinary means, in the last scene of our life's sad tragedy, that we may once more exchange a parting look upon the ruins of time before we separate to our unchangeable destinations. Your lot, my ever-beloved lady, I am persuaded will be blest; you have labour'd much, and will reap abundantly, I snatch'd a sight of you at Crowbery; it was too much for an exhausted frame; I have been sinking ever since; for I heard you was unhappy, and my heart rose against your tyrant, tho' discretion stopt my hand. I pass'd several days about the purlieus of your castle, disguising both my name and habit, lest I might awaken the suspicion of your gaoler: I met that excellent young man, who accompany'd me hither, and sent you a pledge by

his hands, which I thought you wou'd understand as a token I was yet alive. Ever since the inexorable decree that tore us from each other, I have been struggling with my hard fortune, in the hope of earning, by my sword and services, a competency to enable me to return an independent man; but alas! a variety of crosses and misfortunes bore so strong upon me for a course of eighteen years, that, until the last few months of my abode in India, I was toiling against the stream of adversity; at length, one lucky expedition, of which I had the conduct, presented to me the alternative of enormous plunder with a guilty conscience, or moderate earnings with a clear one; I chose the latter, and am now return'd, affluent in circumstances, and, I thank God, irreproachable in character. Never, during this tedious period, did the eye of beauty, Indian or English, draw aside one thought, one wish, one, even the slightest, regard, from the center where first love, and the memory of my ever-ador'd Cecilia, had fixt it for life. The vow that I had made, so seal'd, so sanctify'd, so rivetted into the very heart of honour, was to me a marriage vow—but, I perceive, I give you pain; let me not do that; my expressions,

tho' strong, were only binding on myself; you was not free; you had a father, whom you was forc'd to obey, and, I implore you to believe they were not pointed against your proceeding; I can well suppose your marriage with a wretch like Crowbery was a compulsory one."


"It was, indeed," replied she, raising her eyes for the first time, and turning them upon him in the most affecting manner; "it was impos'd upon me, not only as a command, which I cou'd not disobey, but as an atonement for an offence, which I cou'd no otherwise expiate."


"Gracious Heaven!" he exclaimed; "and was my unhappy Cecilia made to atone for an offence, for which I, vile betrayer as I was, am alone responsible? It is I, then, who am the source of all your sorrows; I, to whose unceasing solicitations your kind heart at last reluctantly gave way; I have been the hateful cause of all your sufferings, like the deceiver of our first parents, the father of all evil."


"Not so," rejoined she hastily; "say, rather, you have been the father of my only blessing."



"What do you mean?" he exclaimed, in a tone of impatience and surprise. "Speak to me, I beseech you, without reserve; lead me the straitest way to truth, for you have stir'd a thought within my heart that will not bear evasion or delay. Am I a father? answer me."


"You are, you are a father," she replied; "and Henry is your son."

As she spoke these words, Delapoer's senses seemed lost in astonishment; he smote his hands together in a transport of joy, gazed upon her eagerly for a while, then cast his eyes to Heaven; his lips moved, but no voice was heard; then throwing himself back in his chair, he seemed lost in meditation, till, roused to sudden recollection, he adjured her, in the most solemn terms, to confirm the truth of what she had told him by an appeal to Heaven. "I take Heaven to witness," she replied, "to the truth of what I have said; conscious as I am that the Judge is at the door, in whose presence I must soon appear, I repeat to you, at the peril of my soul, were I capable of deceit, that Henry is your son and mine."—"I am satisfied," cried Delapoer; and, dropping on his knees, broke forth into prayers and

praises to the Supreme Disposer of all events. She then imparted to him the purport of her will, and briefly related what had passed between her uncle and herself since her departure from Manstock. When he found she had confided the secret to no one but Isabella, except Henry himself and Zachary, who was professionally made privy to it, he paused for some time, and then demanded, why he alone might not stand forth to the world as the father of Henry, without committing her name in any future time. "Let it remain a mystery," he said; "or, at most, a surmise. Why shou'd we give that triumph to the malice of Lord Crowbery? why shou'd we put to shame the family pride of Sir Roger Manstock? I have fortune enough to bestow upon my son; and the first lawyer that is capable of drawing a deed of gift shall secure the reversion of my whole property to him. As for your paternal estate, bequeath it in it's natural course, so that no suspicion rest upon your memory."


"Your suggestion," said the lady, "is truly generous; but it is far too important to be adopted without due reflection: my uncle Manstock has but one child, and she a daughter; she is already superabundantly endow'd;

and to accumulate estates upon the heiress of that wealthy house, is mere supererogation; unless our Henry, who is master of her affections, was as much in favour with the father."


"Cannot it be left conditionally, upon her marrying Henry?" said Delapoer.—Lady Crowbery shook her head, and remarked, that this would little differ, in appearance to the world, from an absolute bequest to him. "Yet if I cou'd depend," added she, "upon her attachment to Henry, or, rather, I shou'd say, upon her father's consent, all might be well; and my son, thro' her medium, wou'd still be my heir: but there is little reliance on my uncle, whilst he is under influence hostile to my wishes."


"Did you not say," he rejoined, "that Miss Manstock was privy to the secret of our Henry's birth? If so, it is to be presum'd, you have perfect confidence in her honour; you also believe she is attach'd to him, else you wou'd not have trusted her with an unnecessary secret: how then can this young lady, knowing Henry to be your son, act otherwise by your estate than either share it

with him as his wife, or restore it to him as your heir?"


"There is much argument," she replied, "in what you say; and, I believe, more true honour does not exist in a human heart, than in my cousin Isabella's; but, after all, we must talk with Henry." This was the most immediate wish of Delapoer's heart, who was longing to embrace a son justly so dear to him;—and now he recited to Lady Crowbery the whole narrative of the action, dwelling with rapture upon the bravery and humanity of our hero: the sensations it produced in a mother's heart need not be described, and it is well they need not, for I should doubt if they can.
In short, we hold our readers in too much respect to sicken them with our descriptive powers, convinced that there is no incident arising from this history, or any other of the kind, which may not be referred to their feelings in natural language, without those tedious circumlocutory embellishments, which only serve to load the page. I trust they will not think the worse of my females, if they are not drowned in floods of tears upon every occasion, or fall

into fainting fits with excess of sensibility; for to such as are pleased with these tricks we do not write, contented to devote our labours to the friends of nature, and to them alone.


CHAPTER VII. Our Hero is restored to both his Parents.
OUR readers need not be reminded, that the hero of this history knew Delapoer to be his father before he was called to a conference upon the proposal stated in the preceding chapter. The meeting took place in Lady Crowbery's presence; and the nameless foundling, whom adversity had so lately crushed, now heard himself acknowledged, and felt the animating pressure of a parental embrace, by turns bestowed upon him, with praises, prayers and blessings, superadded in abundance.

"Son," cried Lady Crowbery, "it has now pleas'd Heaven to let me see this hour, which closes every wish that my fond heart conceiv'd, and blesses me beyond what I have ever merited, or can compute. I have lived

to place you in the protection of a father, I have surviv'd to behold you clasp'd in his embrace; and what can I say—but that the transport is unutterable? A term of life beyond what may suffice to execute the few maternal ties that are yet unfinished, is what I dare not, what I do not pray for, Let us not therefore loiter, for the time is short; let us work while it is day, for darkness and death are at hand. There is a business to be done, upon which I must consult you. My paternal estate is, as you know, in my disposal; it is your's: on whom but on my son can I bestow it?"—"Not so," replied Henry; "bestowing it on me, you avow me as your son, and bequeath your name to detraction and disgrace. Suppose (which Heaven forbid!) Lord Crowbery survives you, what will he say? outrageous insult to your memory will ensue: this may be repell'd, you'll say; but what can be oppos'd to Sir Roger Manstock's discontent? If he will not suffer you to leave a paper in his hands, upon the suspicion only of my name being found in it, how will he resent a will, that is to make me the heir of your estate, to the exclusion of his family?"—"And if Isabella inherits it," said the mother,

"what then?"—"Then she who best deserves it, has it," replied Henry; "and as no earthly blessing can accrue to me, but what originates with her, you put my fate into her hands, who is the mistress of it, whether you so consider her, or not. To her I am known; by her alone I can be made happy; if I have any interest dear to me upon earth, it is to recommend myself to her thoughts; and, therefore, what can best do that, is best for my interest: let the lovely Isabella then possess what she is entitled to, of which, if any share devolves to me, let her bestow it with herself: I cannot be too rich in fortune's gifts, with Isabella to partake of them; without her I shall be beyond the reach of fortune, nothing can lessen or augment my wretchedness."


"Oh, my dear son," cried Delapoer, "how perfectly you speak my sentiments! I adopt your reasoning, nay, rather, I anticipate it, for it is exactly what I recommended to your beloved mother. I have enough, and all I have is your's."

The business was no further pressed, for the conference had been long, and Lady Crowbery seemed exhausted: she was silent, but it

was a silence that betokened acquiescence. As the business could not be done to her satisfaction without the presence of her confidential lawyer Mr. G—, who was in possession of papers, which, according to this plan, it behoved her to cancel, she determined to write to him by express, and request him to come down to her, if his business admitted of it, in person, else to dispatch some trusty and sufficient proxy, who might act in his place: the intermediate time was not longer than seemed requisite for her case, which now became more and more doubtful; for Zachary, who began to assume a very pensive aspect, had taken a medical assessor into council, and both joined in pronouncing that unless some favourable and speedy change took place, the project of embarking her for Lisbon must be abandoned. Delapoer and Henry saw these inauspicious symptoms in the same melancholy light, and drew the most desponding conclusions from them. One evening, when they were in anxious expectation of Mr. G—, Henry, perceiving that his mother would be glad to dispense with Zachary's attendance, drew him aside, and, walking down to the beach, began to question him about his patient, expressing

himself as without hope of her recovery, and under momentary terrors of her immediate dissolution. To this Zachary replied, that although be saw that sad event in approach, and, in his own judgment, regarded it as inevitable, yet he conjectured that she would have a gradual and lingering dismission out of life, without pain or loss of senses; and that no rapid, or immediate, dissolution was to be apprehended. "I hope therefore," added he, "our dear lady will yet find time and capacity to settle her affairs to your satisfaction and advantage, and put you in a situation to propose for the loveliest girl in England, to whom, I perceive, you are very seriously attach'd." No answer being returned to this, he proceeded—"For my own part, I am persuaded there is no love lost between you, as the saying is; and if you have left your heart with Miss Manstock in pledge, you have taken her's away with you in possession; for I am no indifferent physiognomist, and not apt to be out in my conjectures as to the human heart. I had a little private talk with the young lady during our halt at Manstock House; and, I believe, my friend, I did your cause no harm by what I said on that occasion."—"The less

you said, the better," Henry coldly replied.—"Come, come, young gentleman," resumed Zachary, "you are too modest, too diffident; it is not the first time you have stood in your own light with the ladies: And that puts me in mind of my poor boozy dame, who has now, I suppose, drank up her drink, and sleeps in peace. Alexander Kinloch writes me word, and I have this morning receiv'd his letter, that she is absolutely at death's door. Well! God's will be done; I must bear it with christian patience; Mors omnibus communis."—Here the Doctor took out his handkerchief, and, in conformity to custom upon such occasions, applied it to his eyes; where, if there had been a tear, no doubt the aforesaid handkerchief would have done its duty, and disposed of it. "But I must prepare myself to expect the worst," added he; "for if death be at the door, and none but Sawney Kinloch to keep him out, why 'tis natural to conclude, that all is over with my poor dame. To be sure she had her failings, as who has not? but custom familiariz'd me to them. She certainly made some trips in point of fidelity to my bed, but then she was over-partial to the brandy-bottle, and that accounts for her

incontinence, you know, very naturally. She was a little over-righteous, it must be own'd, and saddled me with the saints rather more than was agreeable; but then her religion was mere hypocrisy, so that I cou'd not quarrel with her on that account. She was something of a termagant, I cannot deny; told a pretty many untruths, and bred a pretty many disturbances in my family; but then she did the same by all her neighbours as by me, so that I had no cause in particular to complain of her; and, upon the whole, have as much reason to regret the loss of my wife, as most husbands have to lament for their's."


"Well, my good master," said Henry smiling, "notwithstanding all these good qualities which you have counted up, I am in hopes you'll hear your loss with tolerable composure, and that your days to come will not pass the less to your content because you have no longer a wife in existence, who answers to the description you have been giving: At least I hope life may be tolerable, tho' you have neither sot, slut, nor shrew in your house, to entertain you: and as the time, I fear, is not far off, when you will have a real friend to lament, I foresee that your professional cares

will not long survive your domestic ones, and in that case you will have to look out for a successor in your business. Shou'd that be the case, and shou'd Alexander Kinloch not be the man that answers to your wishes, I beg you will let me recommend to you a friend of mine, for whose sufficiency, in all respects, I will make myself responsible: the person I speak of is your quondam assistant, Mr. William Williams, at present Surgeon of Captain Carey's frigate, a man very highly to be esteem'd for his private character, and of whose abilities, in every branch of his profession, I am bold to promise, you may be furnish'd with the strongest testimonials."—To this Zachary replied, that he had a very high opinion of Williams, and without hesitation should prefer him to every other proponent, not only in respect to Henry's good wishes for him, but on the score of his own merit: as for the old Scotchman, he protested against him in any other capacity than as a cheap drudge at the mortar, if Williams chose to continue him there, which however he should not be very forward to advise.
This matter being adjusted to Henry's satisfaction, he now perceived a chaise and four

stop at Lady Crowbery's door; and running to it, had the gratification of finding that Mr. G— himself had complied with that Lady's request, and come down in person. A short conversation with that excellent man soon opened to him a character, in which integrity is so prominent, that nature, in the formation of it, seemed determined so to place her work as that no one should overlook or mistake it. It will suffice therefore to say, that every thing was done, acording to the will of the testatrix, which method in business and correctness in form could effect: the same opportunity also served for Mr. Delapoer to make his promised settlement on his son our hero; and this being done, our honest lawyer (and as such we venture to pronounce him one of the worthiest members of the community) returned to his station in life; where we hope he will long abide, to protect the property of his clients, and enliven the society of his friends.



CHAPTER VIII. A gentle Being drops into the Grave.
A Few days had passed after the departure of Mr. G—, when the Lady Crowbery, perceiving her small remains of strength hourly on the decline, communicated to her friends her total abandonment of all hope of stirring from the spot she was in; at the same time expressing her acquiescence in the call of Providence, and the thankfulness with which she should obey the summons, in the presence of those who were dearest to her in this world. She still found strength, by intervals, to write a farewell letter to her unworthy Lord, also one of a very affectionate cast to her uncle Manstock, both which she committed to the post: to Isabella she likewise wrote, on a subject more important to her than that of taking leave for life, as it respected the future happiness of her beloved son, and explained (in terms, however, the most delicate) her implied hopes and views in the disposition she had made of her estate; and this letter she put

into Henry's hands, referring it to his discretion in what manner, and at what period, to make use of it.
To Zachary Cawdle she bequeathed an annuity of three hundred pounds a year, chargeable upon her estate, to be paid quarterly and punctually. In small legacies to servants, and charitable donations, a further sum was involved, for which due provision was made, and direction given. Of Henry no mention was to be found in her will; but both to him and his father she gave, with her own hands, several little articles, valuable only as tokens of affection and pledges of remembrance. Every thing that personally belonged to her in Crowbery Castle, of which she had many particulars, were left to the Lord of that mansion; the residue was bequeathed in trust to Sir Roger Manstock, for the use and benefit of Isabella, without entail, and at her free disposal, when she should attain the age of eighteen years, of which there yet remained some months only before her non-age should expire.
Neither her senses nor spirits seemed to yield at the approach of death; every morning she was conveyed from her bed to a couch

in her sitting-room, which had a pleasant view of the sea and shore. Here she was constantly attended by one or both of her beloved friends, whose tender assiduities cheared her to her latest moments; she took particular delight in listening to Delapoer's narrative of his adventures in India, which he contrived to render both interesting and entertaining to her, introducing it at such times only as she seemed to call for it, and in such proportions as might not weary her attention, or too forcibly agitate her feelings.—She also, in her turn, had a story to relate, which, though told with great mitigation towards Lord Crowbery, and with the suppression of many cruel circumstances in his conduct, and sufferings on her part, was not always heard with the temper and patience that she wished to inspire. Delapoer, in spite of all his caution, would sometimes give way to the warmth of his natural character, and once or twice, to her sensible regret, broke forth into menaces and denunciations. These she would, with anxious solicitude, strive to qualify and repress. "If you love me, Delapoer," she would say, "you will remember my words after death, and not disgrace my memory, or disturb my spirit in

the grave, by a revengeful and violent proceeding towards Lord Crowbery. Had he been indulgent and kind to me, how severely would my conscience have reproach'd me; and if, on the contrary, he has been somewhat harsh and ungentle, cannot you recollect enough, both committed and omitted on my part, to extenuate, if not to warrant, his unkindness? You'll say my marriage was a compulsory one—'tis true it was so; but still I was a party, tho' a most unwilling one, in the imposition that was put upon him: in my heart he never cou'd obtain a place; I paid him obedience—I had no more to bestow."

The last conversation of this sort she had with Delapoer was on the evening preceding the day on which she died: she was fervent in prayer that her errors might be pardoned, and, in the most solemn manner, conjured him to conspire with her in atonement, by giving double diligence to the performance of those duties which their joint offence had entailed upon them in the person of their son. Whilst she was thus addressing him, Delapoer, who was supporting her as she sate erect on the couch, perceived a convulsive symptom in the muscles about her mouth, which gave him instant alarm: and the eager look with which

he pursued his observation, convinced her that some change had happened in her features to occasion it.—"Ah! my dear friend," she said, "I understand your looks, I am dying; perhaps I am disfigur'd; if so, leave me, I implore you; do not let the last impression of this face, which you once beheld with pleasure, remain upon your memory with disgust and horror. If I am fit to be seen, let me thus expire, supported in your arms; if not, farewell for ever; let my servants be call'd, and let me not shock either you or my son with an object so distressing." As she faintly uttered these words, she put her hands before her face, which Delapoer gently clasped in his, assuring her, that her suspicion was unfounded, and that her features indicated no such symptoms as she apprehended. He soon after rung the bell, when Henry entered hastily, followed by Zachary and two female attendants: Henry threw himself on his knees by the side of her couch, and continued for some minutes enfolded in her arms, in speechless agony; for he also perceived the change, and saw the hand of death was upon her. A convulsive tremor now seized her whole frame, and she sunk down on her couch insensible, while the Doctor

exhorted them to leave her to the care of himself and the women. Through the remainder of the night she dosed with short intervals, in which she appeared to have some degree of recollection, but never uttered a word or seemed to experience a pain; at an early hour of the morning, she drew her last sigh and expired. The father and the son were standing by the side of the bed at that awful moment, and the smile, which love impressed upon her features, as her eyes caught a parting sight of them, before they closed for ever, remained after death, as if to tell the beholders that her soul, unwilling to derange the beautiful frame in which it had been encased, had left its peace behind it, whilst it conveyed itself away to the mansions of immortality and bliss.


CHAPTER IX. Our History presents a Scene, not very flattering to Human Nature.
WE have now closed the history of the amiable but unhappy Lady Crowbery, and we would fain hope that such of our readers

as are parents, will think the moral of her fate not unworthy of their consideration and reflection.
One of the first duties that devolved upon her afflicted friends, was to give information of the mournful event to her absent connections. This business was undertaken by Doctor Zachary, who immediately penned a respectful epistle to Sir Roger Manstock; and also one in like terms to the Lord Viscount Crowbery, which were sent off by express.
Delapoer and his son determined upon staying by the remains of their lamented friend, till orders should be received from Lord Crowbery respecting the funeral; and Henry took an early opportunity of making his friend Captain Carey acquainted with the sad event, that had now occasioned him to decline all thoughts of rejoining the victorious frigate. The return of the post brought him the following answer from that gallant officer:—



My dear friend,

I loved and respected my relation Lady Crowbery, as much as I despise and abhor the wretch, who not only shortened but embittered her days; and I lament her sad fate

and your loss, from the bottom of my heart. Bear up, however, my brave fellow, and when you are weary of the shore, remember you have a mess-mate, who so long as he has a plank to float on, will be proud to approve himself your's on all occasions, most sincerely and affectionately,

— CAREY.



The messenger in the mean time, who was charged with the mournful tidings of his lady's death, proceeded on his way with all possible expedition; and according to his instructions, first presented himself at the castle of his Lord, and delivered his dispatch. It was received and read in the company of the Reverend Mr. Claypole and Miss Fanny; the former of whom had deported himself with all possible address, and enjoyed the satisfaction of contemplating the flattering prospect, that every hour brought nearer to his view, from the encreasing attachment of that noble personage to his amiable niece. An uncle, more sensitive to appearances, or less persuaded of the purity of the female character, might have proved a troublesome guest to a nobleman of his Lordship's irritable feelings at certain

moments, when the vehemence of his passion carried him beyond the bounds, which some people of more rigid notions would have thought a little on the outside of discretion; but Mr. Claypole was not one of these formal disciplinarians, and accommodated himself to times and seasons with admirable facility. With a soul superior to suspicion, he heeded not those innocent dalliances that passed between the lovers, whilst he had the resource of a book, or a walk, and sometimes of a nap in his chair, to fill up an hour when conversation was suspended, and dumb-shew took place of dialogue.
Captain Crowbery was upon a visit to a friend in a distant country, so that the society of the castle was very much confined, and their harmony seldom if ever interrupted by the intrusion of unwelcome visitors. Miss Fanny possessed the apartment of the absent lady, and had already made some arrangements in the disposition and furniture of it, which she asserted, and my Lord acknowledged, to be very striking improvements. Two or three old domestics, who had considered themselves as appertaining to the lady of the house, were now very naturally regarded

as supernumeraries; and upon a principle of oeconomy, which the Reverend Mr. Claypole took all proper occasions to inculcate, were paid off and dismissed. One or two of these, who had belonged to Lady Crowbery's family from their youth, and were past the age of service, were entertained by Sir Roger Manstock, and charitably enrolled amongst his band of pensioners; the others sought their livelihood where they could find it. By an arrangement with the parson of Crowbery, the Reverend Mr. Claypole took the duty of that parish upon himself, and transferred to him the service of the church at Manstock; to which Sir Roger very willingly accorded, from motives, that in candour we must acknowledge to have had some respect to his own ease and convenience, as well as to the aforesaid Mr. Claypole's. No intercourse whatever had in the mean time passed between the allied houses of Crowbery and Manstock; few souls were less akin than those of their owners and their respective associates.
No charge could be laid against Mother Nature, for having misapplied her workmanship upon the mould in which she had cast the person of Lord Crowbery; nay, on the

contrary, it should seem she had both tempered and modelled it with the most accurate attention, and harmonized it to the soul which it enveloped with the nicest art. No man of common observation could receive a false impression of his Lordship's character from the first glance of his exterior. Nature had not given to him the outward semblance of any one virtue, dignity or endowment, which he did not mentally possess; neither was there one moral failing or defect to be found in the journal of his life, which might not figuratively be said to stand recorded in the title-page of that history: In short, if he had had hypocrisy enough to affect the manners of a gentleman, nobody but a fool would have been capable of being duped by him.
This accomplished Peer, though not quite fitted in all particulars to fill up the vacancy which Henry had left in the soft heart of Miss Fanny, nevertheless was encouraged by that young lady to believe that he was in absolute possession of it. To develope her motives for deceiving him into this opinion might be an unpleasant investigation; but when we have said that ambition and revenge were of the party, it is not necessary to search for others

to make up the number. This young lady and his Lordship were just then engaged in conversation on a very interesting topic, whilst the Reverend Mr. Claypole had dropt asleep on a sopha that filled up a recess in the room; when the servant arrived from Falmouth with the letter, which announced the death of Lady Crowbery. His Lordship read it with a countenance, that did not indicate any of those weaknesses, which human nature sometimes is betrayed into upon a sudden surprize. He perused it with a steady eye, folded it up again with a firm hand, and putting it into his pocket, in a tone of voice which abated nothing of its usual energy, coolly observed, that the expected event was come to pass—Lady Crowbery was dead.
Miss Fanny started from her seat, with an exclamation very frequently applied by ladies of her fashion, to express either joy, sorrow, surprize or any other passion, that attacks their gentle spirits unawares. At the same instant the reverend sleeper sprung from his couch, ready prepared to second any emotion that his noble friend might be pleased to express, either of joy or sorrow: his noble friend did not as yet discover to which party he was disposed

to incline, therefore Mr. Claypole judiciously kept silence, and held his faculties suspended in a neutral state, till circumstances should determine them. "I guess'd how this scheme to Lisbon wou'd end," cried the Peer.—"Yes," replied the Parson, "I suspected it wou'd terminate as it has done, when that booby of an apothecary took upon him the charge of her ladyship's constitution."—"A pretty fellow truly," resumed my Lord, "to be travelling physician to a woman of quality! but I can understand nothing from his letter, but that his patient has slipp'd through his hands; therefore, with your leave, I shall step into my library, and try what information may be gather'd from the messenger."—This said, he rose from his chair, and calmly stalked out of the room.
The uncle and niece were now set free from all restraint, and soon began to let loose their sentiments upon this interesting event, without reserve:—"I judg'd her case to be desperate," cried the uncle; "she was a lost woman when I saw her at Manstock. I cannot say she gave me any great reason to lament her loss: if I ever had any obligations to her, she cancel'd them all by her last haughty

treatment of me, when I modestly made suit for the poor favour of succeeding Parson Ratcliffe." To this the niece made no answer, nor indeed had she paid any attention, as her mind was just then engaged in computing the period of a widower's first mourning; and as this meditation involved her in some dilemma, she abruptly appealed to her uncle, whether it was totally out of form for his Lordship to be married, before he was out of weepers and black gloves: "That is as it may be," replied the uncle, "some people judge in those matters with more liberality and latitude than others; I am no great critic in forms, but this I know, that the sooner you bring his Lordship to the point, my dear Fanny, the better;"—"Why that is done already," cried the Lady elect, "the point is carried, and I have his honour in pledge; else can you suppose I wou'd admit?"—"Certainly not," cried Claypole, interrupting her; "I cannot doubt but you know the ground you are upon, and therefore it is that I have never interpos'd my advice; but now that there is no longer any obstacle, I shou'd recommend you to hold back, till he fulfils his engagements: a seasonable reserve may

quicken desire, too much kindness may chance to quell it."—"I believe," cried the niece, "I am fully capable of conducting myself in this affair, without resorting to an adviser; where there is no passion at the heart, it is not likely there shou'd be any error in the judgment, and I flatter myself you do me justice to believe, I am not in love with the person of Lord Crowbery: he is not a Henry to catch the eye or engage the heart, but he is a Peer of England, has a good estate and a noble castle, which, when I am the mistress of, I confess the triumph it will give me over that provoking chit Isabella, whom I hate and detest at my heart, will not be amongst the least of my enjoyments."

Lord Crowbery, in the meantime, having asked a few trifling questions of the bearer of the letter, dismissed him, and sent for his agent lawyer Ferret, to whom he dictated the following lines, by way of answer to the questions referred to him in Zachary's dispatch:



Mr. Cawdle, Sir,

I am commanded by the Lord Viscount Crowbery to say, that he has receiv'd your's

of the 19th ultimo, informing him of the death of your patient on the morning of that day. With respect to your further enquiries, touching the burial ceremonies, his Lordship bids me tell you he has no answer to give: the heir or heirs of the deceas'd, whoever they may be, will act as they see fit in the case: you have no instructions to expect from him.

I am, Sir, your humble servant, JOHN JEFFERY FERRET.





CHAPTER X. The Scene is shifted to Manstock House.
WHEN the messenger arrived at Manstock House, Sir Roger was just returned home from the county town, where he had been unanimously elected representative in parliament. The mournful news caused deep affliction both to him and the sensitive Isabella; the same servant was charged with a verbal message from Lord Crowbery, signifying

that he declined interfering with any wishes Sir Roger might have, respecting the place of burial and the disposal of the remains; he added, that when the will was opened he presumed he should have notice. Sir Roger well understood the spirit of this message, and properly felt both the insult and the meanness it implied. The instant he could compose his thoughts sufficiently for the purpose, he wrote to Zachary Cawdle, requiring him to transmit the body with all proper decorum and attendance, fitting the quality of the deceased, by easy stages to the family vault of her ancestors, at her paternal seat of Hagley Hall, where himself and his daughter purposed to be in waiting to receive it, and to pay the last honours to the corpse of his most dear and lamented niece. The business this involved him in, had probably the effect of occupying so much of his time and thoughts, that grief had the less opportunity of fixing upon him; but the tender Isabella, who had not so full a share of those avocations, surrendered herself to melancholy and desponding meditations. In her breast also there was lodged a secret of most serious import; and in the mean time she had no instructions how

to dispose of it; these she expected to receive by some hand or other, but what to wish she knew not; whether they should be to impart it to her father, or still to conceal it from him, was an alternative that offered nothing to her reflection, but difficulties and distresses on both sides: that Henry should be left heir to his mother's estate, was naturally to be expected, but how he could be named or described in her will, without a discovery of his birth, was what she could not comprehend: the papers that had been written for her father's inspection after her cousin's death, she knew had been destroyed, and that purpose revoked: she apprehended, therefore, that some order would come to her for divulging it to Sir Roger; and this was a task which of all earthly undertakings was most dreadful to her: In the meantime the preparations were put forward for the journey, and servants were dispatched beforehand to get the house in order to receive them, and to set on foot all the preliminary ceremonials for a respectable and splendid funeral.
In this interval arrived Mr. G— with the will, and his coming was most seasonable, for it was on the very eve of Sir Roger's setting

out on his journey. This event was immediately communicated to Lord Crowbery, and with the messenger, who carried Sir Roger's note to his Lordship, returned not the principal himself, but his representative Mr. John Jeffery Ferret, attorney at law and agent to the noble Peer aforesaid.
The arrival of this august personage being announced, the Baronet with his fair daughter, and the respectable holder and maker of the will, assembled in the book-room, and were soon honoured with the presence of Mr. Ferret, before whom the seals, after being submitted to his inspection, were solemnly broken open, and the will distinctly and audibly read by Mr. G—. The signatures, seals, dates, and every other particular, were minutely examined by the said Mr. Ferret, who was asked by Mr. G— if he was satisfied as to what he had seen and heard; to which, after due time for recollection, he gravely replied, "In point of form I see nothing at present to object to, in point of essence I shall decline giving any answer till I have advised with counsel. This lady died in an obscure and distant corner of the island, the will is also dated not many days previous to

her decease, it will be requisite to ascertain, that the testatrix was actually and bonâ fide of sound mind and judgment at the time of her signing the said will; understand me not, I pray you, as insinuating any thing to the contrary, but being a professional man yourself, you will admit the reasonableness of what I say, which is no more than my duty to my principal requires of me;"—"I believe your principal," replied Mr. G—, "received a letter from the testatrix, written throughout with her own hand, since the date of this will, which if he is not disposed to refer to, Sir Roger Manstock, I am persuaded, has one of as late a date to produce, which will testify to her capacity, together with other proofs, which will be forth-coming whenever you are instructed to call for them: in short, Sir, we shall be ready to meet you in any way you shall think fit to require of us."

During this conversation Sir Roger sate in silent astonishment to find the purport of the will so contrary to his expectations, inasmuch as the name or description of Henry was no where mentioned, nor any bequest whatever specified, that could by any implication refer to him, whilst the agitation it occasioned in

the bosom of Isabella was such, that unable to keep her seat, she rose and demanded of Mr. G— if she might not be permitted to leave the room, which being answered in the affirmative, she lost no time to avail herself of, and hastened away. "I perceive," said lawyer Ferret, "that my Lord Crowbery has no further interest in this will, than what respects a few personals appertaining to the deceas'd, left behind her in the castle, of which perhaps a query might be made as to her Ladyship's right of disposal:"—"That's a query," cried M. G—, "we have no concern with; it can only affect yourselves, therefore you'll manage it in your own way."—"I perceive also," resumed Ferret with some surprize, "here is no mention made of a certain young man, whom we in these parts expected to find remembered by her Ladyship at her death, having seen him so much favour'd by her in her life time." Upon this Sir Roger rose from his seat, and addressing himself to Mr. G— said, "I humbly conceive, Sir, if this gentleman has no legal observations to state, we are not bound to listen to any others, and may break up the meeting." Mr. G— having made sign of assent,

the Baronet departed without further ceremony, and lawyer Ferret having put in his claim for a copy of the will, called for his horse and set forward on the spur, to report his proceedings at the place from whence he came.
This business being ended, Mr. G— joined the Baronet and the heiress, who were expecting him in the adjoining room. Sir Roger began the conversation, by expressing himself very greatly surprized at the purport of his niece's bequest of her entire estate to his daughter: "Nay, I must fairly declare to you," added he, "that I am at a loss how to reconcile myself to the justice of it. The remark which that impertinent attorney made, upon the total silence observed towards a certain young man, who to my knowledge was encourag'd to expect a provision, was a very natural one in itself, though out of place in his mouth: and to say the truth, Sir, I cannot for the life of me comprehend how such an omission cou'd take place, after the promises and assurances I myself have been a witness to. May I ask you to explain this, and how it came to pass that either he forfeited her favour, or that she forgot to make good her

promise?" To this Mr. G— replied, that he could only answer that enquiry in part, by assuring him that the young gentleman in question, had in no degree forfeited the favour and good opinion of the lady deceased.—"Then I am more than ever puzzled to find a cause of her neglect of him," said the Baronet: "Permit me to ask you if he saw my niece before her death:—"He was with her Ladyship, as I believe, to the very hour of her death."—"And was he privy to the will;" demanded Sir Roger? "I doubt," said the worthy respondent, "if I ought in strictness to answer that question, but in confidence I will venture to disclose to you and this lady present, that he was not only perfectly made acquainted with the disposition of Lady Crowbery's property, but also a very active party in the promotion of that measure:"
"Then upon my life," exclaimed Sir Roger, "that same mysterious unknown is without exception the most extraordinary and unaccountable young man now living: this is the second time he has put fortune from him, and voluntarily preferred poverty to affluence."—"I protest I do not see any mystery

in that," said the other, "I clearly understand there are certain sensations he prefers to others, and certain things in this world which he loves better than his interest."

At this moment Mr. G—, in taking his snuff-box from his pocket, dropped his glove upon the floor without perceiving it, which the lovely Isabella immediately picked up and presented to him with a grace peculiar to herself. An attention so flattering, naturally drew a return of excuses and apologies from Mr. G— for his inattention in suffering her to condescend to such an office; to which she replied, whilst blushes overspread her cheeks, and gratitude glistened in her eyes;—"Any thing I can do to shew my respect for Mr. G—, will be an office I shall be proud of." This was pointed in so marked a manner, and introduced with a look so expressive, that it would have been impossible for any common observer, much less for that intelligent person himself, not to comprehend the motive of it; and though Sir Roger gave no sign of his having regarded it otherwise than as an ordinary act of politeness, yet we may risque a conjecture, that he argued from it in his own thoughts pretty much in

the same way with the gentleman to whom it was addressed.
This little incident did not, however, altogether turn their discourse from the topic they were upon: Isabella ventured to enquire of Mr. G— if Henry was recovered from his wound, which question, he conceiving it to allude to the action on board the frigate, drew him into a description of that fight, as he had heard it from Mr. Delapoer. This was in itself an interesting narrative, though not altogether new to the hearers of it, for Cary had written to his uncle since he came into port, and done justice to his brave volunteer; but the warmth of his heart, who had it now in narration, and the affection he had conceived for our amiable hero through the natural sympathy of congenial souls, gave a brighter hue to the description, and animated one at least of his audience in so peculiar a manner, that, at the conclusion of it, she was impelled to venture upon an inference, which in a more collected moment she would hardly have risqued, viz. "That where so much courage and benevolence were united, it was no wonder if every action of such a character,

produced something uncommonly noble and superior to views of worldly minds."

An apostrophe, so much above the pitch of Isabella's natural diffidence, would hardly have passed without a comment from Sir Roger, had not Mr. G— been present, or, let us rather say, had it not been justly due to the merits of our hero.


CHAPTER XI. A Gleam of Hope suddenly reversed.

"WHAT imprudence have I given way to," said Isabella within herself, when she retired to her solitary meditations in her own apartment; "I shall certainly receive the rebuke which I have merited from my father: but Oh! that I might be suffer'd to give vent to my respect and gratitude for that charming man who spoke so warmly of my Henry; yes, yes, he is all that's good and generous, all that is brave and benevolent, all that is engaging, amiable, and excellent in human nature: and now I can interpret his proceeding, I can solve his motives for the sacrifice he has made of his inheritance, to preserve the memory of his mother

from disgrace and shame: glorious, unequalled generosity, which throws him on my honour for restitution; and, thank Heaven, that honour glows within my breast as warmly as within his own. Let the consequences be whatever they may, I swear to truth, I will not be a day in possession of the power to do him justice, without seizing the opportunity for performing it: but is that enough? Is there not another hope at his heart? Is there not another wish in mine? May I not believe he loves me? Have I not heard him tenderly express his feelings, his affections, and what answer did I make? Oh! such an one it was as open'd my whole soul, without the feeble, the fallacious aid of words. My sighs were vows, my parting tears were seals of love, more sacred, more sincere, than all the bonds that law or language can devise; and I will keep them faithfully in remembrance; yes, Henry, whilst I have life my heart can never change; I may be wretched, false I will not be."

Here Sir Roger entered the room; his plea was to enquire if she was preparing for her journey on the next morning; but he sate down, and entered into a discourse that certainly

was not calculated to forward those preparations: he began by observing to her how much he had been surprised at the reading of his niece's will; and asked her, with a smile, how she felt herself affected by the sudden accession of so great a fortune; "I fancy," said he, "you did not expect, when we proposed this mournful journey, that you was going to take possession of your own estate; I can assure you, Isabella, it is a very fine place, and, I am told, has been well kept up, tho' our poor friend never visited it: I hope however it will not put you out of conceit with Manstock House."—"So long as you inhabit it," she replied, "no place can rival Manstock in my thoughts."—"But when you marry you may entertain other thoughts."—"I will never marry any man capable of an attempt to detach me from a preference so natural, so unalterable."—"Then you must not marry any man," said Sir Roger, who has a predilection for his own family seat."—"Having already one more than I want," replied Isabella, smiling, "I hope you think there is no occasion for me to add to it."—"I understand you," said the father, in a tone of good-humour, "the man to your mind must have no encumbrances of

house or home: he must be without fortune."
"I confess," answering quickly, said Isabella, "I cou'd readily wave that, if he had virtue, courage, generosity, good sense, and discernment to respect and honour you; without these qualities I shou'd despise him, had he the wealth of worlds."—"But you know no such person, not you," said the Baronet, looking archly at her as he spoke; "you have never met with any lover of this description, and whilst you persist in so many unreasonable demands upon his character, probably you never will."—"Not above once in my life, I dare say," answered Isabella.—"And once is enough," said he, "if you are sure of your man: look ye, daughter, I love fair dealing and confession; I fancy our friend G— and you are pretty much of the same opinion in this case, for I observe you seconded his encomiums on a certain person with uncommon ardour; now I conceive, when a young lady is so warm in the praises of a young man, and both parties are unmarried, it is a strong presumption that there is a liking in the case; if so, why not confess it? Seeing I have no other power over your mind, except by correcting your judgment where I think it errs, or confirming

your choice where I think it is well plac'd."


"Oh! my dear, dear Sir," replied the grateful damsel, "I shou'd be indeed unworthy of so much goodness, if I did not meet your candour with the sincerest exposition of my heart and its affections. Yes, my ever-hononr'd father, I will confess to you, and I trust I need not blush at the confession, that I contemplate Henry's character with admiration and delight: I do believe it is a combination of all human virtues; and I ground my faith, not upon presumptive partial conjecture, but upon proofs which will bear the strictest examination, which cannot be contraverted by malice itself, and to most of which you yourself can witness. Let his conduct be scrutiniz'd from the first moment that fortune threw him upon our mercy to the present instant; where can be found an example of such patience, resignation, fortitude; of such benevolence, bravery, generosity? What has he not endur'd, what has he not forgiven? Who ever made such disinterested sacrifices to a principle of justice and honour, in the most refin'd, the most exalted sense of those virtues? Neither is he less to be admir'd for the purity of his morals

than for the delicacy of his principles."—"Well, well," cried the Baronet, "so far, so good; you have gone on briskly with his mental qualities, and I don't know that you have said a word too much; but what is it all, if that one thing shou'd be wanting, without which no young lady ever yielded more than her approbation to the bed of men? If the person in which all these virtues center is not agreeable to you, if the form is not elegant, the manners not engaging, the address not captivating, why then, you know, there can be no love in the heart, and praise is all that poor Henry is ever to expect from your lips."—"Ah! my beloved Sir," cried Isabella, blushing, yet with eyes that shewed it was the blush of joy: "now you are rallying me because I have forborne to speak of what I dare say you suspect was foremost in my thoughts; but in points of truth and fact there can be but one opinion, in matters of taste there may be many: it appears to me that nature has been as partial to Henry in person as in mind; you may not see him with the same eyes."—"Not exactly, perhaps," he replied, smiling; but yet I can see enough to comprehend why Fanny Claypole fell in love with him, why Susan

May was distracted for him, and why you, my dear Isabella, do not absolutely dislike him."—"Dislike him," echoed the fond damsel; "Oh Heavens! I shou'd be a wretch insensible to the finest work of the Creator, if I cou'd dislike him: surely, Sir, nothing in the human form can be more perfect than Henry."—"Come, come!" resumed Sir Roger, "you have made up for all deficiencies at last; more need not be attempted, for more, I think, cannot be said; and now, Isabella, having heard your confession, it is my turn to call upon your attention whilst I make mine. In every thing your have said of Henry I perfectly concur; greater proof I cannot give you of my very high opinion of his merit and accomplishments, than by assuring you, that the reasons I have hitherto had for opposing your attachment to him, are, by recent circumstances, in a great degree removed; and as want of fortune alone wou'd in no instance have been my absolute objection, I shall the less insist upon it in the present case, forasmuch as your means are now so great as to make any further augmentation of them by marriage an object not worth attending to. In the place therefore of several impediments, I now see but one remaining,

and that is my ignorance of his birth and condition; I cannot dispense with obscurity or meanness. Now altho' the mystery is not clear'd up by the melancholy event of your cousin's decease, yet the terror of it is remov'd from my mind by the circmstances of her will; for I shall now disclose to you what I shou'd never have mention'd whilst Lady Crowbery was living, that there was something in her deportment towards your friend Henry that gave me great uneasiness and alarm: not that I entertain'd suspicions of the sort which her imperious husband had, or affected to have, of their connection; no, that was not the nature of my terror; the thought was out of reach of probability; the character of the lady gave no countenance to it; on the contrary, there was such an air of maternal tenderness in her regards, that I protest to you, Isabella, I found myself haunted by an idea, that the idle rumour which was spread about the neighbourhood after my niece had elop'd with Mr. Delapoer might have been true, and that this same youth had been the unlawful issue of that connection: under the impression of such an idea, you can't wonder at the vehemence with which I interdicted

your correspondence with him; but now that I see him totally overlook'd in her will, I can no longer entertain any suspicion of his standing in so near a relation to her, and with that suspicion of his being her son, I now dismiss my opposition to his pretensions as your admirer."

Had Sir Roger Manstock waited for an answer to this speech, it would have been impossible for Isabella to have disguised the sensations it produced, sensations as opposite to those it was meant to convey as chilling disappointment is to thankful joy! But he was gone as soon as he had uttered the concluding words, and gone in the persuasion that he had made a being happy, who was infinitely dear to him, whilst she was left to reflect upon a situation now rendered far more hopeless and distressing than it had been in the worst of moments, when his opposition was more open and declared. Whilst she pondered upon this, her bosom heaved with sighs, and her eyes streamed with tears. All those fascinating ideas which her fond father's encouraging discourse had raised in her mind were at once dispersed, and succeeded by a press of thoughts that presented nothing but despair and disappointment

to her imagination. What to do she knew not, and how to shape her conduct in a dilemma so full of difficulties, she was incapable of deciding; for if she availed herself of her father's permission for re-admitting him into the family, what consequence could ensue from such a fruitless indulgence but an aggravation of regret, which every hour of increasing love and approbation would accumulate upon her? On the other hand, what would her father think, after the confession she had made, if she was now to hold back, when she had his leave to advance? What, but that she was the most obstinate and capricious coquette in nature, who was no longer pleased than whilst she was opposed, and had no wishes of her own when they were found to coincide with his? It was now, for the first time, she lamented the confidence that had been reposed in her by her deceased friend and benefactress; for being entrusted with the secret, she could in no case violate her honour by betraying it; and being now made acquainted with her father's motives for proscribing Henry whilst he suspected him to be the son of his niece, no temptation upon earth could overcome her abhorrence of duplicity

or deceit, whilst he should retain a sentiment so adverse to that connection; and in this she foresaw no probability of change.
With heavy heart, therefore, we must leave the unhappy Isabella to struggle with these conflicting thoughts, and turn to other scenes, that are prepared to open the succeeding book.


END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.

VOL. IV.

Ficta voluptatis causâ sint proxima veris,
Nec quodcunque volet poscat sibi fabula credi.

LONDON: PRINTED FOR CHARLES DILLY, IN THE POULTRY. 1795.



CONTENTS.

BOOK THE TENTH.
CHAP. I. In which the Author confutes himself Page 1
CHAP. II. A Peep behind the Curtain at Crowbery Castle Page 8
CHAP. III. An Excursion from Crowbery Castle Page 17
CHAP. IV. There are more Ways than One of interpreting a doubtful Text Page 25
CHAP. V. Our History shifts the Scene Page 33
CHAP. VI. A short Excursion leads to an important Interview Page 42
CHAP. VII. The Interview is brought to a Conclusion Page 51
CHAP. VIII. The Discovery of a posthumous Paper causes great Sensations Page 59
CHAP. IX. The Counsel of a Friend in a Dilemma. More Secrets an brought to light Page 72
CHAP. X. Our History records a dreadful Incident Page 81

CHAP. XI. Which describes the Effects of that Incident, and concludes the Tenth Book of our History Page 95


BOOK THE ELEVENTH.
CHAP. I. Describes what our Heroine is, and what we wish our Virgin Readers to be Page 101
CHAP. II. A modest Suitor does not hurt his Cause Page 105
CHAP. III. Love is the grand Specific Page 118
CHAP. IV. Rash Enterprizes an apt to miscarry Page 128
CHAP. V. Bellum—Pax rursum Page 137
CHAP. VI. An humble Visitor meets a haughty Reception Page 145
CHAP. VII. First Love sinks deep into the human Heart Page 156
CHAP. VIII. When Parties understand each other rightly, Business advances rapidly Page 163
CHAP. IX. Some People preach over their Liquor Page 171
CHAP. X. Four Parties fairly matched at a round Game of Hypocrisy Page 180
CHAP. XI. Breakfast Table-talk Page 190



BOOK THE TWELFTH.
CHAP. I. The Author's last Address to his Readers Page 199
CHAP. II. The History goes back to the Hero Page 203
CHAP. III. A singular Instance of a Journey performed by our Hero and Heroine, without one Casualty by the Way Page 213
CHAP. IV. When Marriages are making, 'tis a Sign the Drama is drawing nigh to its Catastrophe Page 223
CHAP. V. Some of the principal Characters in this History are winding up their Parts Page 231
CHAP. VI. When the Judge is in league with the Advocate, 'tis easy to predict the Issue of the Suit Page 240
CHAP. VII. Occurrences upon a Visit at Manstock House Page 248
CHAP. VIII. A certain Gentleman repeats his Visit Page 258
CHAP. IX. Why is Earth and Ashes proud? Page 272
CHAP. X. Pride meets its Punishment and Love its Reward Page 284
CHAP. XI. The Drama closes, and the Curtain falls Page 293





HENRY.

BOOK THE TENTH.

CHAPTER I. In which the Author confutes himself.
HAVING been so long employed in finding words, according to rule and method, for others, I begin to think I have a right to bestow some according to my own fancy, and that just now prompts me to write without any rule or method whatsoever.
In the first place then, permit me to say, that I do not allow any man can have a fair excuse for not reading these volumes once at least in his life, provided he can read at all. For what is the plea, I would fain know, that he can set up for refusing them a perusal? Is he too wise to be taught any thing new?—they do not pretend to have any new thing in them or about them; they boast themselves to be as old as nature; and as for instruction,

if he is too wise to want it, they are not so foolish as to force it upon him against his wishes.
Is he too lazy to be amused by any reading? then let him employ a toad-eater to recite them in his ears till he falls asleep; he cannot purchase a cheaper or more harmless narcotic in his apothecary's shop.
Is he too proud to stoop his genius to the perusal of a trivial novel? my life upon it, his genius is oftentimes more trivially employed. Is truth his constant study and pursuit? and has he not yet found out that there is truth in fiction; that by the device of fable (as the philosopher Saint Pierre well observes) the soul gradually opens itself to truth? I am vain enough to think there may be many more truths in this poor fable, than he will discover or comprehend in all his metaphysics.
But some may plead business, and business must be followed.—True! and so must hounds; but the man who follows either, be it ever so closely, will still find that he has gone many miles out of his way. Let the man of business recollect how much of his life is spent in being busy about nothing, and he cannot but

acknowledge he has had time to bestow upon the reading of these little books, and a hundred others. But all this while he has been accumulating money; if he dies to-morrow, he will die worth one hundred thousand pounds; and if he does, is he any whit wiser, (I put the question in the words of the inimitable author of The Serious Call) is he any whit wiser, I demand, than he who has taken the same pains to have a hundred thousand pair of boots and spurs when he leaves the world?

But harkye, Mr. Novelist, the fastidious philosopher will say, my studies do not lie your way. To him I could answer—then are my studies, learned Sir, more complaisant than your's; for as far as you yourself participate of human nature, so far you come within the scope of my researches; why then may not you deign to read me, though I do not aspire to copy you? Though your proud castle is barred against my approach, my humble cottage is the seat of general hospitality, and open to you in common with the rest of my fellow creatures. The simple goose-quill, that can fan one spark of pure benevolence into activity by the playfulness of its motion, has done more for mankind than the full-plumed philosopher,

who, with the strut of the goose itself, cackles out his despicable spleen, and hisses at each passenger as he goes regardless by him.
If but one of all my readers has felt the sympathy of a generous sentiment, if another has experienced the conscious sense of self-reproaching turpitude, and blushed at the discovery, I think I have thrown more light into the world, than the philosopher can dig out of the bowels of the earth, though he may thereby affect to decide upon the world's age, as jockies do upon horses by looking in their mouths. What if philosophers have now found out that water is no element? they have neither added to its uses, nor taken any away; and as for me, though, for peace sake, I will forbear to say it is an element, I will not promise them to rest my faith so far upon their dogma, as to say, that it is not. The Author of Nature seems graciously to have ordained, that in searching after things without use, our enquiries should be pursued without success, so that no labour might be wasted upon things that cannot profit us: but it is only after these curious nothings that our philosopher is ever on the quest; and yet he pretends to say, that he has no leisure to bestow upon my men and

women. Why will he not rather study to be informed of what would profit him to know, and submit to be ignorant of what the Great Disposer of the Universe hath, in tender consideration of his short-lived creatures, buried out of sight? As much truth as man's intellects can admit, is accessible to man's enquiries, but ignorance is given to the soul, as the lid is bestowed upon the eye; it lets in all the light it can usefully dispense with, and shuts out what it cannot bear. And now, no more of the philosopher; whilst I am contemplating the statue, let him hunt after the beetle that crawls at the base of it.
There is, notwithstanding, more for me to do; and as these volumes are my clients, so am I their advocate, and must be prepared for all that may oppose me: the next, however, is a gentle caviller, and approaches in a form that challenges my respect; it is a reader I would not offend and shock for all that fame could give me; she comes with modest blushes on her cheeks, and points to certain pages doubled down in my offending work, too highly coloured for her chaste revolting eye to rest upon. What shall I reply to this appellant? How defend myself from one, who comes into the lists

with all the virtues armed in her support? Where now is my impure Jemima? where is Fanny Claypole? where even my benevolent Susan May?—Fled out of sight, abashed and self condemned! What avails it me to say that they are Nature's children? My reproving critic does not wish to make acquaintance with the profligates of her family. In vain I urge, that contrast is the soul of composition; that joy and sorrow, health and sickness, good and evil, chequer life itself through every stage; that even virtue wants an opposite to give its lustre full display: she does not think that scenes, which address themselves to the passions, can be defended by arguments that apply to the judgment: I may be justified by the rules of composition; she is trying me by those of decorum. If I shelter myself in the plea, that temptations are the test of an heroic spirit; that I cannot make bricks without straw; and that although the said straw be of an inflammable quality, yet I must work with such materials as I have: she will not hesitate to admit the necessity of temptations, but she will resolutely condemn the too profuse and prominent display of them; she would work her shades more tender; mine are too bold: if I

say, wait for the moral, she replies, that it is the nature of susceptibility not to wait; the mischief is in the front, the moral is in the rear; the remedy cannot always overtake the disease; and she asks, where is the wit in voluntarily provoking the fang of the viper, because, forsooth, we have a medicine in our closet that will staunch the poison, if we do not slip the time of applying it?
Mark now, candid reader, if I have not wove a hedge about myself, which I have neither cunning to creep through, nor agility to climb; but it is ever thus when I argue with the ladies. If their modesty is of so touchy a temper, as to accuse me of impudence, I know no better way to convince them of their mistake, than by copying that modesty, and making no defence; and sure I am, that such would be their conduct in the case of real attack, when the relation of it only stirs them into such tremors and palpitations: I fear, therefore, that their extreme susceptibility proves too much; those must ride their palfreys with a very loose rein, who are so soon thrown out of their seat upon every little start or stumble that they make.
What I have written, I have written in the

hope of recommending virtue by the fiction of a virtuous character, which, to render amiable, I made natural, and to render natural, I made subject to temptations, though resolute in withstanding them: in one instance only my hero owes his victory to chance, and not to his own fortitude: if virtue therefore cannot read her own encomium, without catching fire at the allurements of her antagonist, she is not that pure and perfect virtue I was studious to pay court to, but some hypocrite, who has basely tricked herself out in the uniform of the corps, for the opportunity of deserting over to the enemy with her arms and accoutrements.


CHAPTER II. A Peep behind the Curtain at Crowbery Castle.
WHILST the gentle bosom of Isabella was rent with a thousand perplexing inquietudes, the proud exulting heart of Fanny Claypole was anticipating the fancied joys of rank and splendour, and already practising the

stately airs of a Viscountess elect. Her uncle now began to pass his time not quite so much to his satisfaction as he had done: though his niece still continued to treat him with external civility, yet there was a gracious manner in it, that conveyed the idea of condescension and protection, rather than of cordiality or respect. The restraint which she and her noble paramour submitted to in his company, though as little as decency could dispense with, was still something more than they could willingly spare on certain occasions, and he then began to discover, that all his accommodating complacency did not quite answer their purposes, and that his absence began to be wished for by both parties. This indeed was more than insinuated to him by dumb shew; for my Lord took frequent occasions of enquiring, whether Sir Roger Manstock would not be uneasy at his parish being left without a resident minister, and once or twice asked him, in a natural manner, if he was doing any thing at the parsonage, and whether it would require any repairs before it was made fit for his reception, intimating, with much seeming kindness, that if there was any thing wanting for his comfort, he would send his own workmen over,

and fit it to his wishes; adding, that it would ever give him the most supreme delight to shew any mark of his respect to the uncle of his amiable friend Miss Claypole. These hints that sagacious gentleman was not slow to comprehend; but it did not just now suit him to put them into practice.
When lawyer Ferret returned from Manstock, and the copy of Lady Crowbery's will, which he had there taken, had been perused by his Lordship, that noble personage, in a manner suitable to his high dignity, expressed a most sovereign contempt for the good things of this world, which it had conveyed in such ample proportion to the fair Isabella, and so sparingly to himself; in fact, it is reasonable to suppose, that as his Lordship's expectations were extremely moderate, his disappointment could not be very great, so that he bore the event without any great exercise of his virtues; one thing, however, he remarked with a considerable degree of satisfaction, and this was, the unexpected omission of any legacy to our hero Henry: this circumstance he communicated, without loss of time, to Mr. Claypole and Miss Fanny, commenting upon it in a stile that sufficiently disclosed to them the

gratification he secretly derived to himself in talking of it.—"You see," cried his Lordship, in his usual stile of pleasantry, "what sort of stuff her ladyship's liking to that young fellow was made of! no longer pipe, no longer pay, was her maxim. He must now sink into his primitive obscurity; all his golden hopes are blasted, and, I dare engage, he is at this moment venting execrations against her deceit and his own credulity. But he is rightly serv'd; may such ever be the fate of all upstart favourites of married ladies!"—Here Claypole chimed in, with an inference or two in the way of retort upon Henry for his refusal of Blachford's bequest, observing, that the man, who, from an affectation of disinterestedness, withstood the favours of fortune when they were tendered to him, generally lived long enough to find himself the dupe of his own vanity, and to bewail his folly in the bitterness of self-reproach and vexation. "I see but one chance that remains for this silly fellow," added he, "which is, to betake himself with all humility to Blachford's leavings, and pay his court, without loss of time, to Mrs. Susan May of meretricious memory, by whose favour he may still subsist upon the bread of

infamy, and sing psalms with Ezekiel Daw to some godly tune, whilst the old dame scums the pot. So ends the history of Henry the Foundling, whose adventures, with the help of a little modern garnish, may furnish matter to some paltry novelist for a scurvy tale, to fill a gap in the shelves of a circulating library; and, if the writer has the wit to make the most of it, he may find out a moral in the catastrophe of his hero, and entitle it, The Rise and Fall of Vanity; for such in fact it is."

Miss Fanny threw a different light upon the subject; she confessed he well deserved the disappointment he had met with; but she did not think that was excuse sufficient for the person who disappointed him. "I own," said that candid young lady, "I have always accustom'd myself to consider a promise as a sacred thing: where I give hopes I think myself in conscience bound to make them good; and on the other hand, where they are given to me, I should hold the person base in the extreme, abandon'd to all sense of honour, and a wretch, whom, without a crime, we might treat as an outlaw and assassin, who violated the faith he had pledg'd, and the word of promise he had given. Now I do not mean to impute this

baseness to any person in particular, much less to the respectable object of our present conversation; I only beg leave to observe, that in all connections between man and woman, where favours have been interchang'd, and promises grafted upon those pledges of affection, they are binding in the most sacred sense, and he or she, who breaks from them, abandon'd in the extremest degree."


"Certainly," interposed my Lord, "without all doubt you speak what every person of honour must admit to be true, and what I, permit me to say, feel, and, I hope, practise, in its strictest sense. Put the case, by way of elucidation only, that I profess myself the admirer of a lady of reputation; I am smitten with her charms; in short, I am in love with her. Very well. Believing me to be a man of honour, she allows me to make suit to her; I gain her confidence, we'll suppose, and she begins to favour my suit; she smiles on my humble addresses."—Here a soft glance from the bright eyes of Miss Fanny brought his Lordship's eloquence to a pause. He gently took her hand, and in a whisper tenderly murmured—"Lovely creature, if you look upon me with those eyes, I shall forget every word

I was saying, every sense will be lost in ecstacy and rapture."—"Go on, go on," said Fanny, smiling, "I am much interested in what you are saying, and shou'd be sorry to interrupt you in the most important part of it."—"Put me in then," said the peer, "for I protest to you I am lost."—"Why, you had just gain'd the lady's affections," replied Fanny; "nay, I believe o'my conscience you was going on too prosperously for her repose, unless you was upon the strictest honour."—"There you are rather before-hand with me," resumed my Lord, "tho', I confess I was coming to the point: be it so then! Let us for a moment suppose that this lady, in pity to my sufferings, or, if you will, in kind compliance with my importunate and empassion'd solicitations, generously concedes those favours, which are the greatest woman can bestow or man receive, can it for a moment be doubted that I am bound by all the ties of honour, gratitude and justice, to indemnify the reputation of my benefactress? Heavens! I were the vilest wretch that ever breath'd, cou'd I do less than tender her my heart, my hand, my name, rank, fortune, every thing that I possess on earth, as soon as ever opportunity

and circumstances wou'd permit. These are my principles, my dear Miss Claypole, and they are such as, I trust, your worthy uncle, if he has listen'd to our discourse, will give me credit for, and approve."


"Certainly, my Lord," replied that reverend personage; "there cannot be two opinions on the subject; were the case to happen as you put it, every man of honour's conduct must be such as you state it; but I must take the liberty to observe, that no woman of honour, who was wise, wou'd put him to the trial."


"Ah! my good Sir," said my Lord, "you speak exactly within the line of your profession, and so far you speak right. 'Tis as natural for you, who are a parson, to preach up self denial, as it is for an apothecary to recommend physic, tho' nature, in both cases, nauseates the dose, and the finest gratification of the senses is sacrific'd by the prescription. That rigid morality, that wou'd strip life of all its best enjoyments, wou'd also divest our hearts of all their most exalted sensations. What wou'd become of those glowing effusions of love and gratitude, if there was no trust, no confidence, no mutual interchange of

honour and good faith? The lawyer, who furnishes my occasions with a loan, and binds me down by the fetters of a mortgage, is a trader in money, who confers no favour on me by the accommodation I derive from it; whereas the friend, who confidentially supplies my wants, and rests upon my promise for indemnification, leaves me under an obligation, that convinces me I was in his esteem, and fixes him in mine. Favours in love are like favours in friendship; the same rule applies to both; to trust is the test of friendship, to be trusted is the triumph of love."


"I believe, my Lord," said Miss Claypole, "we are talking upon a subject, that my uncle has not made his study, therefore we may as well drop it for the present."

This being said, a sullen silence ensued; the advocates for the tender passion no longer deigned to maintain an argument with so unequal an opponent, but contented themselves with giving him to understand, by certain plain-speaking looks, that if he had any private studies to pursue, which might occupy an hour or two of his time, they had resources within themselves for filling up the interval.

The intelligent observer read their meaning in their looks, and placidly withdrew.
Doubtful as I am, whether some of my readers might not think that there was one dialogue too many in my history, were I to record what now ensued between Miss Fanny and the Viscount, I shall omit the recital, and conclude this chapter.


CHAPTER III. An Excursion from Crowbery Castle.
THE next morning both Phoebus and Sir Roger Manstock had harnessed their steeds, and advanced upon their journey before the beauteous Miss Fanny broke the soft bands of sleep asunder, and arose to renew her charms at the toilette. Her protracted slumbers had so far exceeded the accustomed hour of breakfast, that she gave orders to her attendant to serve her in her own apartment: polite enquiries were sent up more than once by his Lordship, to which excuses were returned of a slight indisposition; in the mean time the following reflections arose in that gentle fair

one's mind, upon a review of past occurrences.

"Well, to be sure, there is something very captivating in a title, else this same Lord Crowbery wou'd be insupportable; I perceive I shall be most heartily sick of him before the honey-moon is half out; I shall never have the patience of his former lady; let him beware how he treats me in the manner he behav'd to her; I'll soon shew him that my spirit is at least as good as his own; he shan't shut me up in this dismal castle, and nauseate me with his surfeiting fondness: sure, of all visitations under heaven, that of a stale doating husband wou'd be the most intolerable. Oh! Henry! Henry! why wou'd you reject me? Still, still your image haunts me; my fond heart still doats upon you, and wou'd spurn this odious creature and his titles with disdain, cou'd I but gain your love. But hold! perhaps your disappointment may have humbled you; all hopes now blasted, and Isabella thrown by fortune beyond the reach even of your meditations, who can tell but you are now regretting your own obstinacy, and wishing to recal that fatal hour, when mad with love, and fir'd with resentment—

Oh! horrible! I cannot name the rest."—Here she threw herself back in her chair, and, bursting into tears, fortunately found vent for a gust of passion, that would else have thrown her into violent hysterics. Again she resumed her soliloquy—"What did my provoking uncle mean by saying you must marry Susan May? No; that my Henry will never do. His spirit never will stoop to that; it never shall, if I have influence to prevent it. I'll sacrifice ambition, fortune, every thing to love. I have befool'd myself enough, too much, with this detested lord; I sicken at his name; I'll cast him off for ever.—Stop! where is my fancy carrying me? There are some charms in title, rank and splendour; they gratify ambition, and do not exclude love. I have gone much too far now to recede; I were a fool indeed to pay the purchase, and not reap the profit: I have him sure, and I'll not let him loose. Viscountess Crowbery will pique the pride of plain Miss Manstock. Oh! 'twill be bitterness and gall to that old Baronet to see his niece's coronet upon my head; delicious triumph! glorious revenge!"

Thus whilst her mind was fluctuating betwixt contending passions, my Lord announced

himself with a gentle tap at the door, and humbly asked admittance. It was granted, and as he approached her, he said—"I venture to assume the privileges of a husband, and come to ask, if you have any orders for the carriages or servants this morning, as I think the day is fine, and promises you a pleasant airing. Henceforward, Madam, you command in this house, and the humblest of your servants is now in your presence." This was an address, that merited what it received, a gracious smile, and threw a turning weight into the scale of the addresser and his peerage, that made poverty and Henry kick the beam. This fair beginning was still further advanced by a very seasonable auxiliary, in the shape of a handsome brilliant, set in a ring, which his Lordship with great gallantry put upon her wedding finger. The heart of Fanny Claypole was amenable to so many passions, besides that of love in its common acceptation, that the donor of the ring could not fail to be delighted with the impression it had made; and as that young lady was a better actress than Lord Crowbery was a critic, it is not much to be wondered at, if, upon this occasion, he mistook artifice for sincerity.

After a few indispensible arrangements at the toilette, which my Lord was graciously permitted to be a spectator of, and which were not ill calculated to display her charms in the most alluring attitudes, Fanny signified her intention of taking the air in a little cabriole, drawn by one horse of gentle condition, having been long in the habit of obeying the hand of a less daring driver, and order was given accordingly. Fanny had a scheme in meditation, of paying a visit to Susan May in the course of her circuit, and for that reason chose it should be solitary; she therefore set out, followed by a servant, leaving my Lord at home to meditate on his felicity, or discuss new topics of edification with his reverend guest, as they strolled through the plantations and gardens.
Miss Claypole, after a tour about the park, came upon the village green, and stopt at the gate of Susan's mansion, who soon presented herself, and very respectfully invited her into the house. This was graciously accepted by the Viscountess elect, and after a few common questions had passed and repassed, they fell upon the subject of Lady Crowbery's death, and then Miss Fanny demanded of Susan, if

she had been informed of the circumstances of her will: upon her answering in the negative, she related to her the leading particulars, and observed, with much assumed concern, that it was a matter most surprising to her, how it came to pass Henry should be so totally forgotten, that even his name was not once mentioned, nor any thing that could allude to a provision for him recommended to the heiress, even by the most distant hint.
Susan gazed with astonishment upon her, as if in doubt whether she was to yield credit to the account she was giving of an event so unexpected. "If it is so," she said, "and if my young lady is in possession of the estate, and has it at her own disposal, I can only presume to say she has a noble opportunity of being generous to the most deserving man upon earth; and I can't doubt but she will avail herself of it."—"I think of him as you do," replied Miss Fanny; "but our sentiments, my good friend, may not be every body's sentiments; they may not be Miss Manstock's; and they certainly are not likely to be Sir Roger's. Refunding is a pitch of generous self-denial, that is hardly to be found in any other breast, than one of such superior

magnanimity as your liberal friend's: if you had such a fortune dropt into your lap, I can readily believe that you wou'd be generous enough to invite Henry to a share of it; nay, I can tell you, Mrs. Susan, there are some friends of your's, not far from hence, who credit you for that generosity, even upon your present establishment."


"They may safely credit me," replied Susan, "so far as to suppose I never can forget to whom I am indebted for every thing I possess; I hope, therefore, I am capable of the gratitude they ascribe to me, though not so presumptuous as to annex to it the conditions which they seem to allude to. No, Madam, be assur'd I know him and myself too well, not to know that poverty can never so depress him as to level him with me; the woman Mr. Henry marries must not only be pure from guilt of her own contracting, but even from involuntary stains, which you well know I am not. I believe, Madam, even levity of behaviour, and a forward carriage in the person he might else have admir'd, wou'd change his liking into disgust, tho' she had every other charm that cou'd attract him."

Here it is supposed that Miss Fanny would

have blushed, if art had not been beforehand with nature, and dipt her pencil in the counterfeited tint of modesty and shame. But though nature was barred from one avenue, she found vent at another; and whilst conscious recollection smote her heart, her tongue betrayed how justly she applied the observation to herself. "I can readily understand," she said, "where your remark points, and what person I am to thank as the founder of it; for servants are very apt to retail the scandal that their mistresses propagate. I know there have been very impertinent stories circulated about me; but I wou'd have you, and every one else concern'd with you, to be assur'd, that my reputation is not to be slander'd with impunity: I have friends, Mrs. Susan, that will make those tremble who attempt it; and, I believe, you will soon be convinc'd, that if it is your wish to live here, and enjoy your newly acquir'd fortune in peace and quiet, you will be extremely cautious how you suffer any expressions to escape you, that can be construed to impute the smallest indiscretion to my conduct."

With these words, the lady elect made her exit with all due dignity, and without vouchsafing

a word more, or even a look to Susan, who attended her to the step of her cabriole, where she replaced herself in her seat, and pursued her way towards the castle.
At that instant Ezekiel Daw came forth from his cottage, and turning into the house with Susan began a conversation, which we shall reserve for the ensuing chapter.


CHAPTER IV. There are more Ways than one of interpreting a doubtful Text.

"SO, daughter Susan! I perceive you have had a visit from that young madam of the castle. You did right to receive her with respect, for that is due to our superiors in condition; but if she came with the purpose of enticing you into conversation about our absent friend Henry, it is to be hop'd you had discretion to keep a watch upon the door of your lips, and not to satisfy an importunate curiosity. I have here a letter from our friend

Henry, which announces the death of our respected Lady Crowbery. It is dated from Falmouth, which I understand to be the port from whence she was to have embark'd for Lisbon. It pleased the Supreme Disposer of all events to call her to himself from this world of sorrow by a swift messenger. Be it so! we must all obey the summons, some sooner, some later: it is in vain to lament. She was a pious and a charitable lady, and the poor have lost a friend, which, I fear, will not be replaced to them by that young madam at least, who, as common fame reports, is destin'd to be her successor at the castle. As the Lady Crowbery died in possession of a very ample patrimony in her own right, we may now expect to hear that our beloved Henry is rewarded for his disinterestedness, and made independent for his life: of this I am sure, that the deceased lady was much too just to disappoint the hopes she had inspir'd him with, and far too discerning to overlook his merits, and therefore, child, take notice, I predict a very ample provision for our absent friend."


"That is a very natural prediction for you to make," cried Susan; "I wish I cou'd say it was a true one; but alas, alas, my good

Mr. Daw, our poor friend has got nothing; Miss Claypole just now informs me, that he is not so much as nam'd in Lady Crowbery's will."—"It is a lie," cried Ezekiel, starting from his seat, "it is a false aspersion; Miss Claypole is a slut and a hussey for her pains; a defamer of the dead, and that's a foul and heinous misdemeanor. I pronounce it impossible for the Lady Crowbery to be a deceiver, a dealer in false promises, and a hypocrite at the hour of death, and therefore I reject your information, and abide by my prediction. What, child, will you tell me that I don't know what is in human nature, that I shou'd be made the bubble and the dupe of such a prating minx as that Miss Claypole, who never yet utter'd one truth of Henry since she knew him? Don't we know enough of her dark dealings, not to take her word in any case where he is concern'd? Did not I tell you that she came for no good purpose? and now you see I did not speak lightly and without good reason; learn from this, child, I exhort you, not to trust too confidently to your own rash opinions, but listen to those who have more knowledge and experience than yourself."


Whilst Ezekiel was uttering these words in an elevated voice and upright attitude, a letter was delivered to Susan, which one of Sir Roger's servants had brought over from Manstock. It was from the fair hand of Isabella, and written on that very morning early before she set out upon her journey. Susan cast her eye over it, and then read aloud to Ezekiel as follows:—




Dear Susan,

I cannot leave the country without giving you a few lines on the subject of a melancholy event, of which, as far as your friend and benefactor is interested, I am persuaded you will be anxious to be inform'd.

—"Right!" cried Ezekiel, "now you will find my prediction verified."—"The sad news of my poor cousin's death will probably have reach'd you before this comes to hand, and if so, you will be told at the same time, that he is in no respect benefited by Lady Crowbery in her will."—"There, there!" repeated the exulting prophet, "you perceive the falsehood had got wind." Susan made no answer, but resumed her reading.—"It is true,"—"It is false," cried Ezekiel, "I won't believe it."

Susan repeated—"It is true that his name is not to be found in the will; but lest you shou'd be tempted in your zeal for his interest to make false conclusions, that wou'd be injurious to the memory of the excellent lady, I recommend to you to wait the event, in the full persuasion, that neither she will be found regardless of her promises, nor your most amiable friend unworthy of her affection."

No sooner had Susan read these concluding words, than Ezekiel, in an ecstacy of joy, struck the staff in his hand with vehemence on the floor, crying out—"I told thee so, I told thee so: now wilt thou believe me, silly child, that art drawn away with every breath and vapour of false doctrine. Dostn't hear? dostn't understand that all is well and as we wish it, and that your prattling companion, and her politic uncle, will be confuted in their false sayings? Did not I truly pronounce of the Lady Crowbery that she wou'd not be found regardless of her promises; and dost not thou mark those very words repeated, as it were, from my prophetic lips in the young lady's letter? And now, child, why am I right in my judgment, and these wrong in their's? I'll tell

thee why, it is because I draw my inferences from a clear and perfect insight into human nature, whilst they form their's upon crude conjecture, upon vain imaginations, with which they deceive themselves. And now I will read thee Henry's own letter; listen."



Death hath deprived the world of a most excellent being, and me of a friend, whose loss I must ever deplore: Lady Crowbery is dead. Wherever it shall please Lord Crowbery to deposit her remains, I shall take measures so as to be present at her interment, tho' it may be prudent to disguise my person. When that last duty is perform'd, I propose making you a visit at the cottage. I have much to say to you, and something for the private ear of your fair neighbour, my valued friend Susan.


What were the precise sensations that these last words stirred in the gentle bosom of the attentive hearer, we do not pretend to divine, but something there was either in the found or in the sense of them that suffused her face with blushes, which Doctor Daw, notwithstanding his prodigious skill and penetration, just then happened to overlook, so that there

was time for them to fade away into a deadly pale, which succeeded without attracting the notice of the aforesaid sagacious critic in the human character. How he was employed whilst these changes were in transition, we are not minutely informed; but surely not in the contemplation of one of the most expressive countenances in nature, else the scenery there displayed could hardly have escaped him, though the secret spring that gave movement to it, might have puzzled him to find out.
Now it had so happened in the reading of Miss Manstock's letter, as it has happened in the cases of many other readings, that her two commentators, Ezekiel Daw and Susan May, had two different methods of interpreting the same text; the preacher making it conform to his own prediction, and Susan construing it according to her own first impression of the fact: whilst the one therefore believed Henry very richly provided for, the other persuaded herself he was not worth a doit. Now the reader perhaps may recollect that Miss Fanny, who communicated the intelligence of his being left out of Lady Crowbery's will, threw out a hint at a report, which saddled him upon Susan for a moiety of her means; and

though Susan instantly returned an answer, which, we hope, was proper for the occasion, and well becoming her to make, yet it is not unnatural to suppose that it might raise some ideas in her mind, which she did not hold herself bound to communicate, either to Miss Fanny, or even to Doctor Daw himself. Combining, therefore, these ideas with the concluding paragraph in Henry's letter, that he had something for her private ear, we may find a clue to the sensations that occasioned Susan's change of countenance at the hearing of that paragraph. As to the consequences which this abstraction of thought on her part had with respect to Ezekiel, they were only those of affording him free scope for talking upon any subject he thought fit, whilst she meditated upon another, a privilege he frequently enjoyed in the company of his friends without finding it out.



CHAPTER V. Our History shifts the Scene.
WE now turn our attention to the lovely Isabella, who, on the second day from her leaving Manstock, arrived with her father at the ancient seat of the Adamants, called Hagley Hall. It was a stately though irregular pile of building, in the Gothic stile but in perfect repair, with a handsome park about it and a fine command of water. Lady Crowbery had always kept up a sufficient establishment of servants, by whose care every thing was in good order to receive their expected visitants, though the melancholy occasion that brought them there, kept the neighbours and tenants, whom curiosity or respect would else have assembled, from intruding on their privacy. One old gentleman, the rector of the parish and well known to Sir Roger, presented himself on their arrival, of which he had been apprised by letter from the Baronet. He had been long the administrator of all affairs at Hagley Hall, and the appearance of the place

bore testimony to his care. This worthy person (by name and title Doctor Sandford) was greatly affected at the meeting with Sir Roger and the heiress, whose tears kept pace with his on the occasion: he informed them that a messenger had arrived to apprise him that the body might be expected the next day; whereupon the day following was settled between him and Sir Roger for the ceremony of interment.
It was about the hour of dinner when Sir Roger arrived at Hagley Hall, and Doctor Sandford had provided for their entertainment. His company was a seasonable relief to the worthy Baronet, who, to his great concern, saw his beloved Isabella much depressed in spirits; and though he did his best to comfort her, yet whilst the painful secret of her lover's birth hung on her mind, it cannot be wondered at if all his kind endeavours failed of their effect.
After dinner, however, she kept her seat at the table with her father and Doctor Sandford, with whose company she was greatly pleased; and in truth he was an amiable and excellent man. In the course of their conversation, they fell upon the subject of Mr. Ratcliffe's death,

whose parish adjoined to Hagley, and whose preferment was yet undisposed of. His parsonage house was still unoccupied, bur the duty of the church was executed for the time by Doctor Sandford's son, a young man educated at the university of Cambridge, and lately admitted into priest's orders. In speaking of the melancholy event of poor Ratcliffe's sudden death, the good Doctor expatiated on the virtuous and amiable qualities of his late neighbour and friend with great sensibility, bewailing the irreparable loss which his parishioners had suffered, but avoiding with great delicacy the most distant hint of any expectation for his son. The strongest solicitation would probably have been less efficacious than this very delicacy, which did by no means escape the observation of his hearers. Isabella expressed a desire 
•
f visiting the deserted mansion of Mr. Ratcliffe before she left the country; the contemplation of it, as the residence of so good a man, would impress her mind with melancholy awe and veneration. Sir Roger combined other impressions in his interpretation of this desire; but Doctor Sandford, who did not dive quite so deep into her

motives, proceeded to say, that much as he lamented the loss of his friend Ratcliffe, there was yet another reason with him, that made it a most gloomy spectacle in his sight; "I allude," said he, "to the sudden and unaccountable disappearance of a youth called Henry, who, under very mysterious circumstances, was rear'd and educated from infancy to manhood by that excellent man." A look of marked attention from Isabella, caused him to apply his discourse more immediately to her, and he proceeded to say—"Ah! Madam, to me, who knew this young man, and regarded him as a creature little short of perfection in mind, person and manners, the loss of him without any tidings of his fate, is one of the heaviest reflections which my heart can muse upon. He was devoted to his patron and preceptor, and at his death seemed to have vanish'd like a ghost: whither he went, and what may have befallen him, Heaven only knows; but if human virtue merits a peculiar Providence, surely that youth, so lost to us, will be the object of Heaven's care."


"Your prediction is verified," cried Sir Roger, and immediately turning to Isabella,

who was pale as ashes, tendered a glass of water, which perhaps was seldom if ever more critically applied.
Dr. Sandford, surprised at this alarm, gazed upon Isabella and her father, like a man who perceives he has done mischief, and neither knows what nor how.—"I hope," he said, "I have given no offence, it is purely unintentional, if I have."—"Not the least," cried Sir Roger, "not the least offence, good sir, but quite the contrary; we think of this young man as highly as you do; we know him well, and we love him much."—"I rejoice to hear it," cried Sandford, "from my heart, I rejoice to hear that the young man is under your protection: Heaven has indeed been bountiful in granting him so good a friend!"

It was at this very moment that Isabella, though agitated by a variety of thoughts, conceived the resolution of suggesting to her father the nomination of young Sandford to Mr. Ratcliffe's vacancy, and to back it with all her influence. No sooner had she rallied her spirits, than her eyes directed such a glowing beam of gratitude and benevolence towards those of the good old Doctor, that he

must have been blind indeed if he had not seen, and dull as death if he had not understood the language of that look. He was neither void of sight or sense, but sufficiently quick in both, to perceive that he had given pleasure by his praise of Henry, to one of the most beautiful and not the least sensitive objects in creation; and he was not slow to conclude, that where so much joy was caused some affection must exist; he therefore ventured to enquire where his favourite was to be found. To this Isabella replied, by giving a short narrative of his story, which left him at Falmouth, beyond which her information did not enable her to proceed,—"Then I'll engage we shall see him here," said the Doctor, "and I hope, if he comes, he will gratify me so far as to make my house his home, which will be matter of peculiar joy to my poor son, who has beat the whole country round in search of him, till despair has driven him from the attempt."—"I hope then," cried Isabella, "you will lose no time in giving Mr. Sandford the information so agreeable to him."—Here she was joined by Sir Roger, who so cordially desi
•
ed a servant might be instantly sent off to invite him, that the old man, who confessed he

was hard by at the parsonage, consented with no small pleasure to the summons; and if that fatherly pleasure needed a justification, the appearance of young Sandford, which a few minutes produced, very effectually afforded it, for he was in person, manners and address, a son to be proud of.
Isabella's warm heart immediately accorded to him; he was the friend of Henry; that was enough: the blaze of beauty, that good humour threw upon her enchanting countenance as she welcomed him with smiles, so dazzled him upon his first introduction to her, that his admiration resembled awkwardness, and he scarce knew how to address himself to her; the charms of her voice, and the encouraging sweetness of her manner, soon put him at his ease, without diminishing his respect. The company now naturally classed themselves according to their ages, and whilst the fathers fell into discourse upon matters of business, the young people entertained each other upon topics more suitable to their taste.
Friendship for Henry on one part, and love on the other, were not long in agreeing upon what that topic should be, and it soon became

manifest that the history of our hero's adventures was reciprocally the most interesting subject they could talk upon. Isabella again went over the account, enlarging upon it with many more particulars than she had thought necessary to recite in her first narration; but there was now only one hearer, and to him every circumstance was new; to say that he heard her with delight, is to do justice to but one of his senses, when there was another at least in full occupation, which filled his heart with rapture, and would have made the dullest tale of sorrow pleasing.—"What voice do I hear?" said he, within himself; "what vision do I behold? She breathes through rows of pearls over beds of roses. 'Tis an enchantment! she will vanish presently, and I shall start out of my trance."

When Isabella had brought her history to a close, young Sandford remained silent for some time, as if unwilling to take the discourse from one whom he had listened to with such delight; at last, perceiving that she expected a reply, he thanked her for the entertainment she had vouchsafed him, every circumstance of which had been very highly interesting to

him, whose mind had been so long kept in anxious suspense about the fate of a friend, who was deservedly so dear to him. "I always lov'd Henry," said he, "from a boy, and though there were some years between us, yet his manly character, his command of temper, and excellent understanding, gave him advantages which my greater maturity of age and experience could not compensate for: on many occasions I have profited by his better judgment, not unfrequently by his friendly reproof, and more than once have been very seriously indebted to his zealous spirit and undaunted gallantry: I hear therefore of his behaviour in the fight at sea with much more pleasure than surprise; for I believe nothing braver lives on earth; but there is withal a tenderness and candour in his nature, that endear him to our hearts, as much as his more brilliant qualities entitle him to our admiration. If ever that day shall come to pass, when the clouds that obscure his birth shall disperse, I am persuaded it will be found that he is of noble descent, and should the same good fortune raise him to affluence and an elevated situation, I am certain there is no sphere

in life so extended which his virtues will not  adorn and fill.



CHAPTER VI. A short Excursion leads to an important Interview.
AT the expected time arrived the body of the deceased Lady Crowbery, properly attended, and followed by a numerous company of the tenants and peasants appertaining to the estate. There is no need for us to describe the solemn pageantry of a funeral, it will suffice to say, that the mortal remains of one of the meekest and most benevolent of God's creatures were committed to the vault of her ancestors, with every ceremonious rite that could mark the respect of her surviving friends, and every tribute of unfeigned sorrow that could testify their affection. The service was performed by the reverend Dr. Sandford, assisted by his son, and the body was followed by Sir Roger Manstock and Isabella chief

mourners: a great concourse of spectators were assembled, amongst whom two strangers in horsemens' loose coats, were conspicuous for the eagerness with which they pressed forwards at the interment of the body, as well as for the interest they appeared to take in that affecting ceremony: deep affliction seemed to possess them wholly, and as they held their handkerchiefs to their faces all the while the service was performing, none of those whose attention was drawn towards them (and they were not a few) could get a sight of their faces, or learn by any enquiry who they were. After the service was over they separated themselves from the crowd, mounted their horses, and rode off with speed.
There was one however in that mournful assembly, whose attention had not been so totally engrossed by his share in it, as not to catch a sudden glimpse of these strangers, which led him to a pretty confident conjecture as to the person of one of them. It was young Sandford who had made this observation, and upon the first opportunity which offered of his speaking to Isabella apart, he communicated to her his persuasion that he had discovered his friend Henry amongst the croud, disguised

in a clownish dress, and accompanied by another person in the like habit. The probability immediately struck her, though she herself had not made any observation upon the spectators, general or particular.
We forgot to mention in its proper place, that we had a friend amongst the mourners, Zachary Cawdle by name, who had accompanied the hearse all the way from Falmouth in an attendant coach: he was now lodged in Hagley Hall, and it is hardly to be supposed that our fair heroine had failed to make certain enquiries of him, which might now have made any further questions about Henry's appearance at the funeral unnecessary; but the fact was, that these enquiries had not produced any other information from honest Zachary, except that Henry, accompanied by a gentleman who called himself Smith, had parted from him at Falmouth, disclosing nothing more of his future plan, than that he would be at Crowbery within such a time, and hoped to meet him there upon a certain business; to this Zachary added, under the seal of secrecy, that the se
•…
amed Mr. Smith was veritably that identical Mr. Delapoer, from whom Lady Crowbery was rescued by her father

within a stage of Gretna Green, and who had been ever since in the East Indies, from whence he was lately returned with an affluent fortune. Here Zachary stopt, and with a sagacious look eyed the young lady, whose knowledge of the secret in his keeping supplied all the rest, which he in justice to his trust suppressed.
All this Isabella had gained from Zachary within a few hours after his arrival, so that when Mr. Sandford imparted to her his supposed discovery of Henry, in company with a person unknown, her own suggestions readily found a name for that person, without resorting to Zachary for any further intelligence. There was one reflection Isabella drew from this account, that was consolatory to her mind in its present state of anxious suspense—Henry had found a father, and under all events was probably secured against any future danger of experiencing distress of circumstances: this consideration also helped her to account in some degree for her cousin's silence in her will, an omission otherwise both inexplicable, and in her sense of it inexcuseable.
It had occurred to Sandford, and he suggested it to Isabella, that it was likely Henry

would be found somewhere in or about the house of his deceased benefactor Ratcliffe; and the probability of this so struck that young lady, as to determine her upon putting her projected visit to that mansion into immediate execution. She accordingly, with her father's consent, obtained his chaise for an airing, and immediately directed it to the point she had in view; fortunately for her purpose she was alone, and whilst her heart throbbed with the hopes of meeting the dearest object of its thoughts, reflecting upon the difficulties that darkened all her views of happiness, she trembled as she approached the spot, and dreaded what she most desired, an interview with Henry. At the bottom of a little hanging garden, in front of a neat but humble mansion, her carriage stopt and she got out. A little wicket in a low shorn hedge-row of hornbeam was open, and admitted her into the garden; the slope was rather steep, and she slowly sauntered up it gazing about her on each side, and surveying the small but interesting scene with a pensive sensibility. She was noticed by an old woman, who presented herself at the house door, and asked her commands: Isabella said she wished to see the rooms, and

that it was not idle curiosity, but respect for the memory of the late inhabitant had brought her thither.—"Then pray, madam, walk in and welcome, perhaps you belong to the dear young gentleman who is now in the house, and sure enough I am the happiest creature living to see him safe and once more amongst us, after being lost so long: he is in the little back parlour, which was my late master's study, all alone, and there he has been these two long hours, forbidding me to interrupt him, though I wou'd fain have come in and kept him company, in hopes to have chear'd him a bit, for I know he must be melancholy to think of the days he pass'd in that room with my dear good dead master, who lov'd him as if he had been the father of him."

This intelligence so agitated the tender spirits of Isabella, that she paused in suspense, and for a while stood musing what to do. At length, having resolved to proceed, she desired to be shewn the room where the gentleman was; the old woman conducted her through a little vestibule into a plain neat parlour, and there pointing to a door that was opposite to the windows, she said, "That is my late master's study; there Mr. Henry is."


Isabella desired to be left, and when the dame had disappeared she approached the door, and with a trembling hand turned the lock, and presented to the sight of Henry an object so welcome and so unexpected, that starting with ecstasy from his seat he exclaimed, "Good Heavens! do I behold Miss Manstock? May I believe my eyes? Are you alone?"


"I am here alone," she replied, whilst blushes overspread her face; "and I confess my purpose was to find you out. I heard you was present at a mournful meeting: you was discover'd, Henry, but not by me."

He approached her respectfully; took her hand, and tenderly pressed his lips upon it. It was visible that he had been in tears, his eyes were red with weeping. He fixt them on her with a look so full of love and transport, as caused the timid sensibility of Isabella to shrink back and retire a few steps, which instantly observing he recollected himself, and in the mildest accent beseeched her to believe he knew the distance he should keep in presence of such purity. "But if I had the power," said he, "by words to paint to you how beautiful you are, how exquisitely charming

you appear, thus breaking forth upon me by surprize, and overpowering all my faculties with unexpected joy, you would in candour own I had some struggles to subdue: yet fear me not; if it were possible to lose myself through an excess of love, it is not here, within the mansion of virtue, you cou'd be a witness to my disorder."


"I have no fears," she replied, "I commit myself to you with perfect confidence; and gladly seize the opportunity of conversing with you in private, anxious to assure you that my heart remains unalter'd, that it sympathizes with you in your sorrows, in your joys; for if you have lost a mother, Henry, I am told you have found a father, and that I hope, in some degree, will balance your affliction. As to this estate, which I consider myself as holding in trust for your use, I have only conjecture to assist me in my interpretation of my cousin's will, having receiv'd no private instructions from her before her death; therefore I conjure you, Henry, if you know her wishes, impart them to me fully and without reserve: I am confident it cou'd not be her purpose to pass you over, and heap an useless fortune in your wrong on me."



"Ah! loveliest of women," cried Henry, "of what use is all this world can give to me, without the hope, on which alone I live? If I am bereft of that, I have more than misery can want already; what matters it how a solitary being languishes out an irksome life? Let me sink into obscurity without a name, which only can disgrace the memory of my unhappy mother, and give cause of triumph to her cruel pesecutor, who survives her: perhaps my Isabella's father wou'd be wounded in his pride of family, if I were publish'd to the world the heir of Lady Crowbery and the son of Delapoer."


"Henry," cried Isabella, eagerly interrupting him, "you strike upon the very circumstance that causes all my terror and distress: my father's feelings are exactly what you suppose them to be; and all the opposition he ever gave to your pretensions, arose from the suspicion he entertain'd of your being the son of his niece. He now, from the nature of my cousin's will, is persuaded to the contrary of that suspicion, and is become your cordial friend: knowing, therefore, that he is now acting towards you under the impression of a mistaken conclusion, what a situation am I in!

To avail myself of his delusion, and carry on a deceit against him, is what my nature revolts from; to undeceive him and reveal a secret I have pledged myself to keep, is what I cannot do: hard indeed is that dilemma which puts me under equal difficulties, whether I resort to silence or confession. Nothing can extricate me from it, unless you are so fully possest of Lady Crowbery's mind, or have such written instructions in charge, as may either direct me how to act towards my father, or leave me to make use of my own discretion by releasing me from my engagement. If you have any such therefore to report or to produce, impart them to me, I beseech you, for both our sakes."



CHAPTER VII. The Interview is brought to a Conclusion.
WHEN our hero heard himself thus earnestly called upon to produce the letter he was encharged with, though his delicacy would have been better gratified, could

he have been absent whilst Isabella read it, yet he no longer hesitated to deliver it to her, telling her at the same time that it was written by his mother three days only before her death, and that the contents had never been imparted to him, nor in any respect suggested by him. To this she made answer, by assuring him, she gave perfect credit to his delicacy in the business, and that her only apology for reading it in his presence was her wish to be instructed in her cousin's pleasure touching an affair, on which their mutual happiness depended. "I am fetter'd," added she, "till this letter sets me free, if indeed it shall do that: without some clue to guide me, how shall I ever extricate myself from this labyrinth of difficulties, in which I am lost? Oh Henry! before I open this important paper, let me confess to you that I perceive all which is dear to me in life may be decided by it; and I feel a thousand anxious fears, lest fidelity to a fatal promise, and duty to a respected father, should seal me down to silence, and separate us perhaps for ever."


"And wou'd that sad necessity," he demanded, "so terrible to me, cause a regret in you? Does my beloved, my adored Isabella

wish to reward her Henry's faithful love? Have I an interest in her heart?"—"You shou'd know that," she tenderly replied, "for you possess it wholly; that fond heart is your's."

Language is nothing; words can give no picture of those soft emotions which a sincere and virtuous passion, when alarmed by dangers, can in the crisis of its sate excite within a feeling bosom. It is then the soul looks through the eyes, and by its own intelligible emanation intimates to the beloved object thoughts and sensations, which no eloquence can so describe. Such was the look that in this interesting moment glanced from Isabella's eyes to Henry's. He had been more or less than man, had he remained unmoved and master of himself. Our hero was a man, one of the bravest and the best of Nature's family; but still he was her son, and by inheritance made subject to those sallies and alarms of passion, which mere mortality cannot at all times conquer and repress. Temperance he had, we have given it upon proof recorded in his history; respect he never wanted in the presence of virtue, and virtue was present in the person of Isabella; yet impetuous love

hurried him on, and as her fond eyes glanced upon him, he threw his arms in rapture round her beauteous waist, and pressed her ardently in his presumptuous embrace.
I am but Nature's copyist, her scribe, and dare not add or take away without her leave: it is Nature therefore, and not I, that must explain why Isabella, pure as the untouch'd lily, did not shrink away and sever her sweet form from Henry's arms: yet so it was, and so I write it down as my responsible directress dictates. The letter was yet unopened, and now the blushing Isabella, having mildly reproved her too ardent lover, and taken her seat at some little distance from him, read as follows:


Fully sensible that my last hour of life is close at hand, I write to you, my beloved Isabella, whilst it is yet in my power, a few lines, to be delivered into your hands by my son, when I shall be no more. An unexpected meeting with his father, under most peculiar circumstances, having providentially taken place, I have at their joint instance been prevailed upon to bequeath my whole fortune to you, making no mention whatever of my Henry in my will.

Their motive for this generous sacrifice has been extreme delicacy towards my memory; and mine for complying with it has been confidence in your justice, and a perfect conviction that my Henry lives but in the hope of sharing life and all its interests with you. If this happy union takes place all will be well, and my spirit shall rest in peace: if not, alas! no wealth can profit him; nothing that I can give will save him from despair. Duplicity never was my Isabella's character; I therefore die in the persuasion that you love my son: that love will inspire you with the means of reconciling your connection with him to the feelings of your father, be they of what sort they may. I leave this to your conduct and discretion, and for that purpose totally release you from all past promises respecting what in secresy I have imparted to you: I only think Lord Crowbery should not know it, as his insulting temper may in that case provoke events that might disturb your future peace, and plunge you into serious distress. May Providence direct you in it's wisdom, and preserve you in it's mercy! Think of me with the candour that belongs

to you, pardon my errors, protect my memory, remember my last wishes: You and my Henry will have my dying prayers! Farewell for ever!

CECILIA.



Isabella having perused this letter with silent attention, delivered it to Henry for his reading, which, when he had done, he said, as he returned it to her—"My fate is in your hands; whether I am or am not avow'd to Sir Roger Manstock, depends on your pleasure; and so entirely am I resign'd to it, that if your commands shall be for my immediate departure, painful as obedience in that case will be, yet I will obey, provided I am not banish'd without hope, but may be permitted to believe that there is one conclusion in that letter, on which all my happiness depends, not falsely drawn, and that the fond persuasion, in which my lamented mother died, has some foundation in your heart. There, whilst I hold a place, life must be dear to me, and my ambition to deserve at distance some remembrance in your thoughts, will animate me to such efforts, as may happily, in time to come, obtain your father's favour. Behold me then,

loveliest of women, your devoted creature, and pronounce my doom."

Here Isabella raised her eyes, and turning them upon him, with a look that smiled through tears, replied,—"If 'twas with me to pronounce upon your fate, your happiness wou'd be complete; for why shou'd I affect to disguise what your own observation must have discover'd, that you have all the interest in my heart, which this letter gives you? Well might the dear lamented writer be persuaded of a truth too obvious to escape her, nor doubt of an attachment which I, so far from striving to conceal, hold it my point of honour to avow. Hypocrisy has ever been my scorn; I trust that modesty does not need it, and I am certain that your character will ever grace the woman that admires it."


"Then I am blest indeed!" exclaimed the enraptured lover; "thus honour'd by your approbation, I am fortified against all difficulties: direct me what to do, for I am ready"—"There I am still to seek," said Isabella, "and time does not allow for our debating this important point with the deliberation it requires. One thing is certain, whilst you are undiscover'd you will be sure to find a welcome

from my father: come to us then with all your former mystery about you; make your own observations on the spot, we shall have opportunities of further conversation on the subject, and those opportunities perhaps will not be totally unpleasant, though they may not produce all the effects that our uncertainty might wish for. We may renew our walks at least, and you may amuse your fancy with projecting future alterations and embellishments in a place that must at all events become your property. We shall remain a few days in this spot, and though we cannot cheer your spirits with amusing scenes or lively company, my best endeavours shall not be wanting to dispel the gloom of sadness, or to share it with you in bewailing our lost friend, and soothing you with all the tender sympathy that a fond faithful heart can feel."

Saying this, she leant her hand on his, and gently pressed it; the sweet manner of it was so modest, and withal so captivating, that all his senses were absorbed in love.—"Now we must part," she said, "my time is out, and these are moments, Henry, that will never stay: but come to us, I charge you come; I shall prepare my father to expect you, and let

it be this evening." This said, the lovers separated; Isabella returned to Hagley Hall, and Henry to his father.


CHAPTER VIII. The Discovery of a posthumous Paper causes great Sensations.
THE death of Lady Crowbery had so deeply affected Delapoer, that Henry saw with concern a very visible alteration in his state of health, and a fixt melancholy that seemed to take possession of him wholly. Balancing between duty and inclination, he scarce knew how to decide with respect to Isabella's tempting invitation. Upon discoursing with his father, however, he found him so resolved to take up his abode in the neighbourhood of Hagley, that he immediately began to cast about in his thoughts for some fit place for him to reside in; and it soon occurred to him that the very house, where his late happy interview with Isabella had taken place, would be

of all situations most desirable, if that preferment should devolve upon any person unencumbered with a family: this idea, by a very natural transition, suggested to him the probability of his friend young Sandford's being thought of for that succession; and as he entertained a very high opinion of his merit, he determined to employ his interest with Isabella in his behalf.
This idea Henry communicated to his father, and found him so eager to embrace it, and so pressing for him to lose no time in visiting Sir Roger Manstock, that he set out for Hagley Hall without delay; here he received a very cordial welcome from the worthy Baronet, whom he found alone, and already apprised of his coming by Isabella. Speaking of his niece's death, Sir Roger took notice to Henry of his being overlooked in her will as a matter that caused some surprize, and which he could not well account for, having heard the deceased more than once declare her intentions of providing for him at her death; adding, that he considered himself as heir to those intentions, and telling him not to be cast down, for in his friendship he should find a resource against all disappointments.

To this Henry made answer, that the excellent Lady alluded to, who always acted from the best and purest motives, had faithfully fulfilled all promises she had ever made him, and that his grateful respect for her memory would never cease but with life itself. He thanked Sir Roger for the offer of his friendship, which he accepted as the highest honour he could aspire to, and which he would study to merit and preserve by every effort in his power; favours of any other sort, he flattered himself he should not stand in need of.
Here their conversation was cut short by the arrival of Doctor Sandford, who had not been many minutes in the room, before Henry had the satisfaction to hear Sir Roger Manstock acquaint him, that, with his daughter's concurrence, he had determined to nominate his son to the living late enjoyed by the Reverend Mr. Ratcliffe. The good man expressed a lively sense of gratitude on this occasion, and his happiness seemed complete.
Henry, in a private conversation with his friend Zachary Cawdle, revived the subject of Billy Williams; and as Zachary was now determined upon retiring from business on his annuity bequeathed to him by Lady Crowbery,

he very readily engaged to make over his shop and effects to Williams, upon fair and equitable terms, which should be adjusted when that gentleman should obtain a discharge from his ship, and make his appearance at Crowbery, for which place Zachary intended to set out the next morning. This matter being settled to Henry's entire content, for he was much attached to Williams, Zachary began to speak of matters more immediately interesting; and turning to our hero, he said—"In this very room where we are now sitting, I brought you into the world; and surely it is now full time you should assume some proper name and station in society. Life is uncertain; and though, thank God, I feel myself stout and hearty at this present moment, yet we are all liable to casualties, and nobody can say how long it may be before I follow your good mother, in which case you wou'd lose a witness to your birth, whose testimony is most material. You have a father, it is true, whose fortune can in some respect indemnify you for the disinterested, and give me leave to call it, the wanton sacrifice you have made of this noble property, which had else been your's; but that father a
•…
, if I have any skill in my professsion,

is in a very precarious state of health; his spirits sink, and his constitution threatens swift decay. It behoves you therefore, my dear Henry, to look about you: if you have put aside your inheritance, in the hope of sharing it with the amiable young lady who now possesses it, methinks you wou'd do well to lose no time in bringing that expectancy to bear; and why you shou'd persist in concealing yourself from Sir Roger Manstock, who seems to be so favourably dispos'd, and entertains you with such kindness and regard, is what I cannot understand. You'll pardon me for the freedom I take in talking to you on a subject, in which I am no otherwise concern'd, but as my friendship and good wishes interest me in every thing that relates to you; for in truth, dear Henry, I have a very warm and tender heart towards you, and ever had from the first moment fortune threw you in my way."


"Your zeal," said Henry, "can stand in need of no apology; and I am free to confess to you, that my situation with respect to Sir Roger Manstock bec
•
mes every hour more and more irksome to me, as every species of disguise must be. When I know that I am

indebted to a misconception for the kindness he shews me, I cannot enjoy the fruits of it with content. It blights the happiness I shou'd else receive in the society of the loveliest of women; and though I have every reason to fear that the discovery of my birth wou'd be instantly follow'd by my dismission from every hope that points towards an alliance with his amiable daughter, yet my conscience so revolts against deceit, that I will sooner meet the worst of misfortunes, and embrace despair, than persist to act the counterfeit, as I have hitherto been compell'd to do. You therefore see, my worthy friend, how entirely my feelings coincide with your counsel; and I am resolv'd, with Isabella's leave, to-morrow shall not pass without an explanation on my part: let me then request, that you will not set out upon your journey, till that event is over, as it cannot fail to happen that we shall appeal to you."

Zachary signified his perfect compliance with this request, and Henry declared his resolution accordingly. An occurrence in the mean time had come to pass, which anticipated all the consequences incidental to that resolution. Sir Roger Manstock, whilst discoursing

with Doctor Sandford upon some particulars relative to the living intended for his son, had occasion to refer to some papers of the late Mr. Ratcliffe, which the Doctor told him were to be found in a certain old-fashioned cabinet, where he himself had deposited them upon the death of that gentleman, and of which he kept the key. The papers were easily found; but in taking them out, it appeared to Sir Roger, that there was some secret machinery at the bottom of the cell, in which they laid, for hiding money or valuables in a small compass; and upon a closer scrutiny, a joint was discovered, which, upon the insertion of a penknife, was made to slide back, and in it was found a small packet folded in the form of a letter unsealed. Upon opening this packet, Sir Roger immediately recognized the hand-writing of his brother-in-law Sir Stephen Adamant, and read as follows:
Particulars relative to my daughter Cecilia, to be communicated to her uncle, Sir Roger Manstock, after my decease.
This title he read aloud, and here he paused, closing the paper, and observing to his companion, that it was a very extraordinary

and to him a very interesting discovery. "I confess to you," added he, "my curiosity is highly agitated, nay so much am I affected by the suddenness of the surprize, that I can scarce command myself enough to proceed with the perusal of it. It seems to have been my brother's purpose that I shou'd be made acquainted with the contents, yet no such communication was ever made to me, so that in honour I am hardly satisfied that I ought to read any further. Have you, Doctor Sandford, any knowledge of this paper? You was most in the confidence of Sir Stephen: if you have any information on the subject, give it me; if not, advise me what to do."


"I have nothing to guide me but conjecture," replied the Doctor; "but I shou'd presume there need be no hesitation on your part to read what professes to have been written for your information. The early attachment of our dear lamented lady is well known to every friend of the family; and I shou'd guess the paper may refer to that: there has ever been a mystery consequential of that transaction; and as it is probably develop'd in that posthumous packet, I will with your permission retire, whilst you examine it in private."

So saying, he left the room, and Sir Roger read as follows:—
Particulars relative to my daughter Cecilia, to be communicated to her uncle, Sir Roger Manstock, after my decease.
Upon the 14th day of August, 1761, my daughter, then of the age of sixteen and upwards, secretly escaped from Hagley-house, in company with a young cornet, the honourable Henry Delapoer, purposing to effect a stolen marriage at Gretna Green.
The young man, I confess, had made fair and open proposals for my daughter; but I had other views, and positively prohibited the connection. He was formed to engage a heart like Cecilia's; his person was fine, his manners and address were captivating in the extreme. Alas! mistaken man that I am, I knew not to what extremes her passion was capable of hurrying her, and foolishly expected that my authority could extinguish it. Love and nature set my power at nought, and my child, (in every other instance of her life the most dutiful creature breathing) broke those from every

filial tie, and elop'd with her admirer. Furious in my wrath, and equally exasperated against both parties, I pursued them along the road with such unremitted exertion, that upon their very last post I overtook and surpriz'd them in a public inn, where they were changing horses.
Here I forc'd them (Oh! fatal violence!) from each other's arms, in spite of prayers, entreaties, and even confession, on Cecilia's part, of an anticipated consummation, that took from innocence its virgin gloss, and, in the course of time, to the dishonour of my house and the ruin of my mind's future peace, occasion'd my poor child to be an unmarried mother, whilst her disconsolate lover had left his native country, and embarked for the East Indies.
Early in the month of May ensuing, Cecilia was secretly deliver'd in my own house of a male infant. Zachary Cawdle, a faithful man, and skilful in his profession, assisted her in that painful extremity.—Heaven and earth! can I describe my anguish, my remorse, my terrors, in those moments! What would I then have given could I have recalled the banished father of my wretched grandson! How did my conscience

rack me with remorse for having torn two hearts asunder, pledged to each other by every sacred vow, and virtually though not legally married! Oh! had I then had mercy in my wrath, had I allowed for nature, for affection, for the weakness of a fond doating girl at sixteen years of age, what misery had I prevented! what shame had I avoided! Let no father henceforth tread in my unwary steps—they will but lead him to remorse and agony.
And now ten years are past, whilst I have seen my daughter married to a despicable lord, who is her tyrant rather than her husband. In her my generation legitimately stops; no fruit can spring from such a stock; her bed is barren, and her heart is broken. Thank Heaven, my grandson Henry still survives; protected, reared and educated by the best of men, and of friends the most faithful, I see him fostered into early virtues by the forming hand of Ratcliffe. God of all mercies, bless and prosper the mysterious issue of my hapless child! Whilst my sad daughter lives and is Lord Crowbery's wife, I dare not venture to avow the son of indiscretion. Hard fate

for him, poor innocent, for my Cecilia, for myself!
Is there a friend now left to me on earth, in whose humane and honest heart I can repose my sorrows and my secret? Let me still hope there is; surely Sir Roger Manstock is that candid, that trust-worthy friend.
To Sir Roger Manstock, to the uncle of my child, in confidence I bequeath this mournful narrative of my errors and misfortunes, imploring him, by all that he holds sacred, to protect and father the last relict of my house, my nameless unacknowledged child, to whom I trust a mother's love and justice will bequeath that property, which in this firm persuasion I Have devised to her, and put into her free and absolute disposal, without limitation or restraint. Let Henry then take his father's name; I would not leave a stigma on my daughter's memory. May Crowbery never have to say he took the refuse of a favour'd lover!
Sensible that I am hastening to the close of life, I would fain dedicate my short abiding time to atonement and repentance. To

you therefore, Sir, my brother and my friend, I address this paper, avowing a full sense of my past errors, and a deep contrition for that haughty spirit of revenge, which prompted me to blast the happiness of two persons formed for each other, wedded in spirit and in heart; and who, but for my fatal interference, would have blest the remnant of my days. To you, Sir, my brother and my friend, I once more solemnly bequeath my grandson Henry: you are yourself a father; you have a lovely daughter two years younger than my boy; nature has taught you how to judge of my sensations by your own. To your family my fortune would have devolved had not this son of my Cecilia stood between us: may I not form a distant hope that time and education may hereafter so adorn and grace the work of nature, as to make him worthy your regard and love? The outset is auspicious; the promise of his infant years is flattering in the extreme. Should this fair blossom ripen into that perfection, which its early bloom gives hope of, and should your sweet child, my pretty god-daughter, when time with lenient hand has moulded her soft

beauties into womanhood, be touched with tender pity and esteem for my adopted Henry, need I despair of your candour; or must the want of that last form, that my precipitancy interrupted, haunt him through life, and cast him off from happiness without his fault? May Heaven inspire your heart with sentiments more generous! and may he, who mixes blood from no ignoble source with that which he derives from me, merit a blessing great as my fond fancy has devised. Farewell!



CHAPTER IX. The Counsel of a Friend in a Dilemma. More Secrets are brought to Light.
THE perusal of this paper, which pointed out to Sir Roger Manstock the son of his niece, in the person of Henry, the admirer of his daughter, threw him into deep meditation, and exceedingly perplexed him how to act in a case, where decision on either side militated against his feelings. The appeal was solemn, that pleaded in favour of the youth,

the objection to his illegitimacy, and even to his proximity of blood, was no slight one, and Sir Roger's mind was long time balanced between difficulties. One point his conscience saw in the clearest light—the equity of Henry's claim to the property of his grandfather; and, according to the high sense of honour natural to him, he interpreted the paper he had just been reading: but how to act with respect to his daughter, whether to oppose or to countenance her attachment, was the question that embarrassed him. On the opposing side, there was a strong repugnance, arising from his habits of thinking, and from a certain pride of family, which revolted from the stain of illegitimacy; on the favourable side, there was much occurred to mitigate the rigour of these thoughts. The character of Henry pre-eminently pleaded in his behalf; the fatal consequences of paternal obduracy, so forcibly set forth in the recital of Sir Stephen, was a striking example before his eyes; and the pathetic adjuration, at the close of that recital, was an affecting appeal to his heart, which was sensibly felt.
'Tis in a crisis like this, when the mind is fluctuating between doubt and decision, that the voice of a friend is most welcome, and

then it is that new reasons, or reasons differently expressed and dilated, seldom fail to cut the knot that puzzles us to unravel. Sir Roger rung his bell, and requested the company of Doctor Sandford.
A better arbitrator could not be chosen; he read the paper attentively, and when called upon for his sentiments upon it, deliberately replied as follows: "I am not surpris'd at the discovery, which this paper gives; for though I was not a party to the secret of this young man's birth, I was ever in my private opinion persuaded of his being the son of those very parents now disclos'd to us. Well may the unhappy writer bewail his own obduracy; I knew the party rejected, and thought him every way deserving of the alliance he courted; Sir Stephen knew my sentiments, for he drew them from me, and I honestly committed my opinion to his consideration; it did not tally with his own, and I lost his confidence by the sincerity with which I gave it. Mr. Ratcliffe, in consequence of this, had charge of the infant—a better choice cou'd not be made, a worthier, wiser, more enlighten'd mind no man possest—to an education so excellent, the son of your niece did ample justice. Nature

never form'd a more engaging person, instruction never cultivated a more accomplish'd mind."

Here Sir Roger interposed, declaring his entire concurrence in this testimony to his merits—"But with what face," he demanded, "can I hold up to the world the spurious issue of my deluded niece? What will Lord Crowbery say? What will the world at large say to an adoption like this? I shou'd be glad to hear your sentiments on this point of difficulty."


"With this paper in my hand," replied the Doctor, "I cannot resist the appeal it contains, nor refuse being advocate for the feelings of the writer of it. When I see a father taking on himself the reproach of being sole author of his daughter's errors and misfortunes, and weigh the circumstances that attended their elopement and arrest upon the way, I can hardly be induced to call their issue illegitimate. I shou'd go too far, if I was to deny the right of a parent to restrain, or to direct, the passions of his child; but Sir Stephen went farther, and exerted more authority than belong'd to him, when he compell'd a marriage with the Lord Viscount Crowbery; that is an act of tyranny over the human heart,

which I hold in abhorrence. What vows were interchang'd between your niece and her first lover we cannot know, but we can well conjecture they were solemn and sincere on both sides. Their hearts were married, tho' the blacksmith was not found that wou'd have clinch'd the chain. Shall then the son of love and promise be disclaim'd, because a few hours interven'd, and force was employ'd to tear their hands asunder, and compel them to a separation? Mark how the parent suffers in his conscience for this act of cruelty! So wou'd not I for all this world can give me. Henry is a virtuous youth: affix what criminality you please to the authors of his birth, we cannot so pervert all sense of justice, as to attach their stain to his character, however much we may wish to cover the memory of his mother from the malevolent attacks of Lord Crowbery and others, who may be basely dispos'd to blast it. This, I confess, shou'd be avoided as much as possible; and surely it will be no impossible thing to do that by proper precautions, with respect to Lord Crowbery at least, so long as he survives, which seems to have been the clear intention of the deceas'd lady, when she forebore to name her son in her will; and

as you have told me Henry himself was the chief promoter of this omission, I cannot doubt but he was fully acknowledg'd by his mother before she died."


"I don't doubt that," resumed Sir Roger, "and I hold my daughter bound to restore him to his inheritance upon every principle of honour and justice; but I am not bound to give him my daughter also."—"Far be it from me," replied the Doctor, "to say that; your daughter's inclination must precede a step so essential to her own happiness as that."—"But am I bound to follow, with my consent, her inclinations, if they shou'd point to him?"—"I must decline an answer to that question, being so partial as I am to Henry."—"Why that is answering it," replied Sir Roger, "to the fullest extent." Here their conference was interrupted by a servant, who announced a gentleman of the name of Smith, that requested a few minutes conversation in private with Sir Roger Manstock. Order being given for the gentleman's admittance, and Doctor Sandford having withdrawn, the father of our hero presented himself to the worthy Baronet, and addressed him to the following effect:—

"I am personally unknown to you, Sir Roger Manstock, but am no stranger to your

character, and hold it in the most perfect respect: I have therefore solicited a few minutes of your leisure, and you have politely granted it, for which I thank you, and will study not to abuse your patience. I have sent in a name by your servant, which, in your presence, I shou'd be asham'd to wear, being only an assum'd one, for reasons that, I trust, you will think not unworthy of a gentleman. My real name is Henry Delapoer, which, in times past, you may have heard attach'd to that of the loveliest, and by me the most lamented, of her sex; pardon me, if for the present I can proceed no further."

Sir Roger started with amaze; he smote his hands together with more than usual energy, and gazed upon the stranger with intense curiosity—"May I believe what I hear!" he cried; "Are you really Mr. Delapoer, the honourable Henry Delapoer, father—" There he stopt short, and checked the words that were upon his lips.—"Sir," interjected the visitor, "you was proceeding with your speech; may I request you to fill up the sentence?"


"You may," replied Sir Roger, after a short pause; "the words I was about to add were, the father of my niece's son."—"My

conscience then is clear," said Delapoer; "you are possess'd of the secret, and I have broke no trust. Yes, Sir, I am that very person; miserable in the recollection of the bitterest disappointment that ever blasted human happiness, but honour'd in the virtues of that son, who is at once the memorial of our misfortune and the relict of our love. I may now say to Sir Roger Manstock all that a wounded heart suggests; I may speak of my sorrows, of my affection, of my despair, which is now hurrying me to the grave, where my betroth'd, my ever-lov'd Cecilia sleeps." Here a gust of tears interrupted his speech for a few instants; he wiped them away, and proceeded—"It is now my request, and I hope your charity will grant it, that my remains may be allow'd to rest in the vault beside those of that sainted being, who was by every obligation sacred in the eye of Heaven my true and all but legal wife. Sir, we were bound together by the holiest ties. Accursed be the breath that dares to contaminate the purity of my Cecilia's fame! If there was crime in our precipitancy, that crime be on my head, I will embrace the whole of the offence; let her unfeeling father take on himself the responsibility of our separation!

Sir, I have held it matter of the strictest conscience, ever since that fatal moment, to keep unviolated the marriage bed, and I have religiously fulfill'd that sacred duty. One melancholy consolation Heaven vouchsaf'd; Providence employ'd the arm of my son to rescue me from death, when I was a prisoner on board a ship of the enemy, and at the last stage of existence; he brought me to the port of Falmouth; his piety and care preserv'd my life; fortune directed Cecilia to the same spot; I pass'd some days by the couch of that dying martyr, and she expir'd in the arms of me and of my son. Grant me then, I beseech you, my last earnest prayer, and let my corpse repose by her's."

The Baronet, whose long silence had been the effect of his sympathy in the feelings of the speaker, now found himself called upon for a reply at a time, when he was much more inclined to give a loose to tears than to words. He commanded himself notwithstanding so far as to assure his visitor, that his suit was granted, and to add withal, that he hoped it would be many years before that promise could be claimed. To this Delapoer replied, with many acknowledgments, that nothing but

his conviction that no time was to be lost could have excused to himself the rude intrusion of so unseasonable a visit.
Here he paused, and seemed preparing to take his leave, when it occurred to Sir Roger as proper to apprise him, that he had possessed himself by chance of a posthumous paper, written by his niece's father, which had thrown great light on his state of mind, and which at the same time devolved a duty upon him, on the part of his daughter, of reinstating Henry in the whole of his grandfather's estate. "This," added he, "is an act of justice which I think I can take upon myself to say will be infallibly perform'd on our part; and I shall now put the paper into your hands for your perusal, and very highly interesting it is to you, Mr. Delapoer, and your representative."



CHAPTER X. Our History records a dreadful Incident.
DELAPOER having read the paper, returned it to Sir Roger, observing, that although the writer's change of sentiments

came too late for redress, it was to be hoped they were in time for the full purposes of repentance. He then proceeded to disclose to Sir Roger the state of his own circumstances in point of fortune, which, being settled upon Henry, would at all events make him an affluent man. "There is but one object in life," added he, "can make him a happy one. If I know his thoughts rightly, it is the person, not the property, of the present heiress of this estate, which he would receive as the greatest bounty she cou'd bestow upon him."

To this Sir Roger simply replied, that Henry was certainly a very amiable young man; and Delapoer, too delicate to press his wishes any further, politely took his leave and departed. In fact, the mind of the worthy Baronet was by no means made up to any determin'd measure, and as the recent death of Lady Crowbery secur'd him from any present call from either of the parties, he very gladly availed himself of the excuse for holding back his opinion, till it was more matured by experience and reflection.
Henry now wished to throw aside a mask he was no longer compelled to wear, and to declare himself to Sir Roger Manstock; but

as it was necessary, in the first place, to consult Isabella's opinion in the case, he followed her into the park, where he understood she was gone to take her evening walk. When he had mounted the hill that rose from the house, he caught a distant glimpse of her, as she was entering a grove of oaks, and immediately set out towards the spot with all the speed he could. He was yet at some distance, when a female shriek was heard as coming from some one in the grove, which struck him to the heart with the apprehension that his lovely Isabella was in danger or alarm. Already nearly breathless with his exertions, terror gave him all but wings upon a call so pressing, and he sprung forwards towards the voice with an impetuosity undescribable.
Swift as his motion was, our history demands a pause before we bring him to the rescue of the affrighted Isabella, whilst we account for the cause of that shriek so terrible to the ears of love.
In the near neighbourhood of Hagley House, without the enclosure of the park, there was a lonely mansion, tenanted by a person whose melancholy profession it was to take charge of those unhappy beings, who are deprived of

reason. One of these distracted objects, and probably the most pitiable in the whole wretched fraternity, was a young man of the name of Saunders, only son of a respectable clergyman, who had bred him in the line of his own profession, and given him an excellent education with that view, both at school and university. The youth, whom nature had endowed with uncommon talents, had more than equalled all the warmest expectations of a fond exulting father. Every honour that moral conduct could merit, every prize that successful genius could contend for, had been fairly gained, and worthily possest, by this young student; but strong imagination and a feeling heart, the natural concomitants of superior genius, had conspired against the peace of poor Saunders, and by a disappointment in love, had made wreck of a mind full freighted with science, and richly endowed with every noble quality. The object of his passion was unfortunately one, to whom, in point of rank and circumstances, he could not aspire; and though she felt his merits, and was flattered by his attentions, yet his suit was peremptorily and proudly rejected by her father, who had higher views, and over-ruled the affections of his

child with absolute authority. The same fine taste that taught him to select and admire the purest models of classical composition, inspired him with a passion for the elegant and beautiful Louisa Beaufort: his opportunities of conversing with her were not frequent; for Sir Ferdinand her father was not easy of access from one so much his inferior, and Saunders was reduced to a variety of humble shifts to make known to Louisa the flame that was consuming him, and gradually undermining the foundations of a solid understanding. The smile, which at some stolen moment she could bestow upon him, was his only hope; on these reflections he fed, and, by the help of a vivid fancy, sketched out dreams and visions of happiness, which in one fatal moment were for ever blasted, by the intelligence of her being married to a titled lover. From this instant his deportment became irregular and capricious: at first he was loud and vehement in his complaints; he talked of the affair to all his friends, professed to treat it with contempt, and railed against the sex in general, venting upon them all the invectives, which his memory or imagination could suggest: he ransacked the poets ancient and modern for

epigrams and lampoons, and had by heart every tag and fragment of satire, which made for his purpose, and which Greek, Latin, or English could supply. If any one of his acquaintance spoke in praise of a woman, or even toasted the health of his mistress, he was ready with a dash at his folly, which oftentimes would have brought on serious discussions, had he not been very generally considered as a licensed railer, or had his companions been as prompt for quarrel as himself.
This humour being spent, his mind took a sudden turn to the contrary extreme, and poor Saunders was no more to be found in society; sullen and inaccessible, he shut himself into his college room, and centering all his ideas, heretofore so wild and excursive, in one single point, and dwelling invariably upon that with pertinacious melancholy, the vigour of his intellect began to melt away, whilst his constitution, partaking of the same debility, and attenuated by long fasting, was hastening to decay by actual inanition. A student, late so regular in his duties, could not absent himself from college hours without drawing the attention of his tutor and other members of the society upon him; the former of these one day

took means of surprising him in his room, where he discovered him on his knees, employed in loud and fervent prayer, to which his presence gave not the smallest interruption, whilst the poor supplicant continued to deplore his wretched state of mind in terms truly piteous and disconsolate, intermixt with petitions most earnest and devout for the preservation of his reason. His pitying visitor was melted at the scene of such distress, and having waited for a proper interval, applied such consolation as his charity could suggest upon the emergency, and instantly dispatched a letter to the father, apprising him of the dangerous condition to which his pupil was reduced. This sad intelligence soon brought the afflicted parent to be a witness of the total ruin of his hopes; he took the poor distracted creature with him to his own house, where, finding no relief to his disorder, but, on the contrary, an encrease of every symptom to an extravagance, that kept him under hourly alarm, he at last resolved to resign him wholly into the hands of a keeper, and in this house, before described, he placed him, where, for some months, he had been confined under proper regimen, though without any progress towards 
cure, of which his wretched parent now began to lose all hope.
It had so chanced this very evening, that with a cunning peculiar to his distemper, he had contrived to elope from his keeper, and running out of the house at random, had made his way into Hagley Park, escaping the sight of his pursuers by hiding himself in the grove, where he was lying buried under the thickest of the underwood, when chance brought the beauteous Isabella, in her solitary ramble, to the very spot where he was concealed. A glimpse of her fair form, which his quick eye caught through the bushes, roused him instantly from his lair, and springing on her like a couchant tyger on the unwary passenger, he seised the trembling victim in his arms, roaring out in a yell of transport—"Have I caught you then at last, vile perjur'd woman! traitress to my love! murderer of my peace! false, faithless Louisa, you have driven me to desperation; you have made me what I am, mad as the fires of Hecla, wild as the waves that swallow navigation up; and now, syren, I'll be reveng'd upon you for my transformation; a beast of your own creation shall devour you; I'll pluck asunder those fine limbs, and scatter

them to all the points of heaven. Come, come, no struggling; hence with all this frippery! away with it! you are but Nature's counterfeit; we'll have her full in sight, and then—."

Upon the instant, in that saving momentary crisis on which humanity will not admit of speculation's pause, our hero Henry, breathless, aghast, led thither by that unseen clue, which Providence had graciously bestowed for virtue's timely rescue, sprung upon the lunatic, and with a phrensy equal to his own, grasping him in his arms, hurled him violently to the ground, never quitting his hold, but accompanying him in his fall: in the same moment, the dishevelled Isabella, her cloak, handkerchief, and clothes torn from her, dropt inanimate at his side, without uttering even a sigh that shewed signs of life. Distracted with the sight, still he did not venture to let loose his desperate antagonist, who raved and foamed in all the furious excess of phrensy, yelling and gnashing with his teeth, a spectacle too horrible for contemplation. Emaciated as he was, the very spectre of famine, still his madness gave him nerves almost supernatural, and in their grappling all the vigour Henry's active

limbs could furnish, sometimes scarce sufficed to keep him under, and hold him down extended on his back; at length the wretched creature gave one desperate struggle, then uttered a direful groan, and swooned upon the spot, stretching his limbs as if in the last pang of life.
Happily at this moment the keeper and his follower, guided to the spot by the yells and howlings of their patient, made their appearance, to the unspeakable relief of our exhausted hero, whose terrors for the beloved object, lying breathless by his side, were now become too agonizing to endure. Instantly he raised her in his arms, replaced the scattered fragments of her dress with tenderest attention, arranging it in a manner as decorous as her situation and his own distraction would admit, and calling out to the keeper for assistance in recovering her from her swoon. The man had skill, and was not wanting in humanity; he knew withal the quality of the lady who stood in need of his assistance, and was terrified, not less on his own account than on her's, for the consequences of what had happened: bidding his servant take charge of the lunatic, by tying up his hands, he applied

himself directly to the recovery of the lady, and drawing out a case of lancets, recommended the immediate opening of a vein; this was eagerly acceded to by Henry, and in a few seconds the pure blood that fed the veins of the fairest form in nature sprung forth from the lancet, and at the same time the brightest eyes that ever lover looked upon, unveiled their lids, and fixt their sight on Henry, who, whilst assisting the operation just performed, had received upon his person the full gushing tribute of that sanguine stream so much dearer to him than what fed his own fond heart. The sight of this, to which in his confusion he had not adverted, so terrified the reviving Isabella, that the first sign she gave of recollection was a scream of terror on the discovery, crying out to the operator—"Leave, leave me, and staunch his wounds; he is bleeding to death, and do not think I will survive him."

Joy seised the heart of Henry to hear the voice of his beloved Isabella, and to hear it first employed in anxious concern for him; he eagerly assured her he was not wounded; that the blood which alarmed her was her own:

and upon these assurances, the stream that had stopped began to flow again, and her senses grew clear by the revulsion. When her arm was bound up, and her mind became composed, her attention was attracted by the disorder of her dress; surveying the confusion and derangement which her person had undergone, she perceived that certain articles had been replaced by hands not practised in those offices, and the sensation covered her with blushes: the emotion was not lost upon Henry; he could interpret what was passing in her thoughts, and took occasion, with a delicacy peculiar to himself, to allay and soothe her inquietude. She turned a look upon him that beggars all description; love beamed in her eyes, gratitude filled them with tears; then having caught a glimpse of Saunders, as he was under custody of his keeper, turned away with shuddering from the sight, and fell upon Henry's neck, crying out—"Oh my Henry! my preserver! from what horrors have you rescued me!"—Let those that have the powers of description paint his transports if they can; I sink beneath the task, and recommend it to the reader's fancy, if ever he

experienced joy like this; if not, I wish he may deserve it, and obtain it.
The wretched object that had occasioned all this terror now engaged their attention; he had recovered from his swoon, but so wan and woe-begone as would have extracted pity from a heart of a stone; he was sitting on the ground, his hands confined with a bandage swathed round his wrists; he rolled his eyes about in wild disorder, and at last fixing them on his keeper, drooped his head, gave a deep sigh, and burst into tears. He was now at once become as meek and humble as he had been outrageous, and reason seemed to have revisited his mind with the return of temperance.—"I am a very wretched creature," he cried, "and sensible of my misfortunes, that sometimes drive me into extravagancies I never fail to repent of: I know it is for my good that this worthy gentleman ties up my hands; but if he wou'd have the charity to set me at liberty, I wou'd convince him that I am not unfit to be trusted with the use of them; if he will not grant me this favour, I shou'd be much beholden to him, wou'd he have the kindness to remove a few paces out

of sight, whilst I speak a word in the way of atonement to the gentleman I have offended. I have a secret on my mind, which I am desirous of imparting to him, and I can assure him, on my honour, I am this moment as perfectly in my senses as any man in England."

Here the keeper turned a look upon him, which he quickly understood as a sign for silence, and obeyed: a look no less intelligent was passing at the same moment in another quarter, for Henry, fixing his eyes upon the keeper's follower, recognized the person of the assassin O'Rourke, and perceiving certain indications in the fellow's countenance, which convinced him he was right, he said to him in a whisper—"Don't be alarm'd, O'Rourke, for I shall not betray you: if you execute this melancholy office faithfully and humanely, you are in a way to atone to society for the crime you have committed."




CHAPTER XI. Which describes the Effects of that Incident, and concludes the Tenth Book of our History.
POOR Saunders being now removed, and the operation of the bleeding having succeeded in restoring Isabella to the full possession of her senses, and in some degree of her strength, she declared herself able to walk to the house, and forbade the proposal of sending for a carriage, as it would create an alarm which could hardly fail of finding its way to her father. With her natural grace and good humour she accepted the apologies of the keeper of the lunatics, Gordon by name, who was very anxious to exculpate himself to the heiress of Hagley, and to tender his further services, if occasion required. In accounting for the escape of his patient, through the negligence of his servant, he took occasion to observe by the way, that a derangement of the reason, proceeding from disappointed love, was universally experienced to be the very worst species of madness that human nature was subject

to; this, he said, was unhappily the case of Mr. Saunders, whom he despaired of as perfectly incurable.

"Alas!" cried Henry, "I pity him from my soul: I dare say his story is a melancholy one, but we will not trouble you to relate it."—This he said as a hint to Gordon, that any farther discourse on the subject, in Isabella's hearing, should be avoided; and it might be in part from the same motive that she declined his offer to attend upon her home, relying solely on the arm of her protector for her support by the way, and leaving Gordon to resume his melancholy vocation in the mansion of misery, on the skirts of the common, adjoining to the park.
Henry now, for the first time in his life, regretted the length of way he had to measure with his lovely but languid charge, and proceeded slowly and cautiously, regardful of every motion that might disturb her, and directing every step for her security and ease. With hearts full of gratitude to Providence, and glowing with the tenderest affection for each other, they walked silently on till they reached the boundary of the grove, where they came in view of the house, upon an open

lawn, that sloped with a gradual descent for the rest of their way. Here they were descried by Sir Roger and Doctor Sandford, as they were walking and conversing together within a few paces of the house: the Baronet observing that Isabella walked slowly, and seemed supported by Henry, on whose arm she was leaning, instantly took alarm, and calling out to the servants, who happened then to be out of the way, was heard by young Sandford, who, bolting out of the hall-door, flew to the call.—"Run, I beseech you," said Sir Roger, pointing to the spot, "run to Isabella yonder, and tell me what has happen'd, for I greatly fear some accident has befallen, or some illness seiz'd her!"—Whilst these words were on his lips, the eager messenger caught sight of the object they referred to, and, seized with the like terror, sprung forwards with his utmost speed, whilst Sir Roger, trembling with apprehension, caught hold of his friend hy the arm, and stood motionless on the spot, in dreadful expectation of the event. In the same moment, whilst Sandford was straining every nerve against the hill, Isabella, taken suddenly with a giddiness and loss of sight, had come to a stop, and unable to keep her

feet, had fallen into Henry's arms, who, with one knee upon the ground, was supporting her whole weight on his breast and shoulder, himself pale as ashes, and oppressed with such agony of soul, as to be almost in the very act of fainting, when Sandford came most critically to his assistance. The house-servants mean time had seen what was going on, and taken the alarm; a pair of horses had fortunately been put to the chaise, and were ready in the stable-yard; one of the servants had presence of mind to order them to the spot immediately, which was as instantly obeyed. During this operation, Sir Roger remained immoveable, a spectacle of pity: Sandford saw his distress, and as soon as ever the chaise and servants came to the assistance of Isabella, ran back with all haste to Sir Roger, making signs, and calling out by the way that he had good news, all was well, and no danger. Two servants had very considerately mounted behind the carriage, and by their help the faint and languid Isabella was lifted to the seat, and placed upon it as much at her length as it admitted of: she now opened her eyes, and cast them round in search for her preserver; he was sitting on the ground totally exhausted,

and in a situation, as it seemed, more piteably helpless than her own. She would not move without him, and he could not stir without help towards her.—"Lay me on the floor of the chaise," he cried, "and let me expire at her feet."—She heard his voice, but luckily the words did not reach her ear: at that instant she started into life, and recovered as one out of a trance; the mist vanished from before her eyes, and seeing Henry on the ground, she conjured him to arise and come to her in the chaise. Her father and Doctor Sandford now approached: Sir Roger's agitation, though much assuaged by what had been told him, was still very great, and as he came up to the chaise, the door of which was held open, she cried out—"Oh! my beloved father, be in no alarm on my account; dismiss your fears for me, and exert all your care for the recovery of my heroic preserver, to whose courage, under Providence, I am indebted for my life."—Henry was now on his legs, and re-animated with the sound of her voice, seemed to have lost his debility with the terror that had created it: as he presented himself to her sight, Isabella exclaimed,—"Oh! blessed be Heaven, my protector

lives!"—Upon these words, Sir Roger turned a look upon him, in which that excess of gratitude, which will not admit of language, was so strikingly depicted, that, as he threw his arms about our hero's neck, he seemed to give him his whole heart with the embrace. His cheeks were wet with tears, he trembled and was faint; but nothing could persuade him to avail himself of the chaise; he peremptorily insisted upon Henry's taking his seat by Isabella—"Go, go," he cried, "I will not rob you of the honour you have earn'd; with you the darling of my soul is safe; take the place you so well merit, and let the same arm that sav'd my child, support her."


END OF BOOK THE TENTH.



BOOK THE ELEVENTH.

CHAPTER I. Describes what our Heroine is, and what we wish our Virgin Readers to be.
THE time is so nearly approaching, when I must close this history, that I am now in the situation of a man, who, being on the point of parting from friends, in whose company he has taken a long and pleasant tour, is anxious to call to mind any faults or omissions he may have fallen into, that he may explain such as will bear a justification, and ask pardon for what demands an apology.
To enter on a review of all my errors, is a task above my hands; but there is one, I apprehend, apparently too gross to be overlooked by any of my readers; I mean that of neglecting to describe the person of my heroine. If this is a crime, it is the more unpardonable, forasmuch as I cannot plead oversight

and inadvertency in excuse of it; I have kept her portrait wilfully in its case, and not disclosed even the colour of her eyes, or set to view a single locket of her hair. Fielding's Sophia had locks of glossy black, more modern novels give their heroines flaxen tresses and azure eyes; there is a fashion in beauty; perhaps my Isabella had neither the jet of the raven, nor the ivory of the swan: I would prefix to these volumes an engraving from her portrait, but Henry would not let it out of his hands; and our great artists are so fully employed, that not one was at leisure to go down to Manstock-house to take the copy.
Now, as I have not the vanity to attempt an undertaking, which I believe no author has yet succeeded in, I will not aim to describe what will not bear a description: singularity or deformity may be delineated by the vehicle of words; perfect beauty eludes the power of language. Let it suffice for me to say, upon the faith of an historian, that my heroine was all the most doating lover, when dreaming of his mistress, fancies her to be, and something more than the self-admiring beauty beholds, when she examines herself in the glass. Yet in many things she fell short of some, whom

I have heard extolled above the modesty of praise: her eyes could not express what their's excel in; when they sparkled, it was with benevolence; when they languished, it was with pity; they were not repulsive enough to look a modest man out of countenance, nor attractive enough to inspire an impudent man with hope; good nature dimpled round her lips, that encased two rows of purest pearls, but scorn never pouted in the one, and the grin of folly never was put on to disclose the other: her voice was melody that kept the middle tones, for it could neither sound the pitch of an affected scream, nor grumble in the base note of a sullen murmur: her motions were the expressive marks that charactered her mind; composed and temperate, rage never agitated them; pride never distorted them; light and elastic when she hastened to the succour of the wretched, she neither aped the languor of sickliness, nor the mincing step of affectation: she danced gracefully, but not like a professor; loved music, but was no performer; had an eye for nature, but never libelled a single feature of it by pen or pencil: she had read sufficiently for her years, and profitably for her instruction; she could express her thoughts in

speaking or in writing elegantly, and without embarrassment; but she possest in its perfection, the still happier gift of a patient ear whilst others were speaking, and of a polite attention to what they spoke. Being the only child of her parents, the little bickerings of brothers and sisters never irritated her temper, nor did the triumphs of a rival ever fan one spark of envy in her breast: educated entirely by an excellent mother, she had no communication with governesses and servants, nor any friendships with caballing misses. That she was deceived in supposing her heart so pre-occupied by filial affection, as to be unassailable by love, these sheets have sufficiently evinced; but when she found herself surprized into a tender attachment, and fully understood the merits of the person who inspired it, she scorned to masque herself in false appearances, played off no vain coquetries to teaze and tantalize her lover by affected scruples and counterfeited fears, but with a candour, that resulted from her purity of thought, gave him to know the interest he had gained, justly conceiving artifice need not be used to smother a confession, which honour dictated, and delicacy might avow.

If I offend against refinement, by describing an ingenuous nature, I make no other answer but by an appeal to the hearts of my readers, as in like cases I have done to those of my spectators: let them decree! when men of doubtful characters, for doubtful purposes, approach the fair, let the fair resort to their defences; I am no casuist in a case of cunning, nor am I fond of working to my point by crooked paths, or describing the base properties of degenerated nature. If any of my female readers has been taught to think hypocrisy a virtue, by the necessity she has been under of resorting to it, I will not argue against her prejudices for a friend that has been so useful to her, I can only say it is not a virtue I am studious to bestow upon the character of Isabella.


CHAPTER II. A modest Suitor does not hurt his Cause.
WE left our heroine in distress, we therefore seize the first instant that our history admits of to resort to her again, and now

we find her with Henry at her side, under escort to Hagley House, where we commit her to the care of her assembled friends, with every anxious wish for her speedy and entire recovery.
As soon as the superintendant of the insane patients had seen poor Saunders securely cased in a straight waistcoat, and lodged in proper hands, he hastened to make his enquiries after the lady, who had suffered so severely by the negligence of his people, who had let a creature so wild as Saunders escape out of their charge. Interest and humanity conjointly prompted him to pay this mark of respect and atonement to a person who was now become proprietor of the house and land he lived in. Sir Roger Manstock was accessible to every body, and of course Gordon was admitted: from him he received the whole melancholy detail of Saunders's case, and the providential rescue of his beloved Isabella from the clutches of a raving maniac, inflamed with revenge against the sex, and probably bent both upon violation and murder. What were his obligations then to the courage and vigour of her defender, when he heard, with horror thrilling through his veins, this awful narrative of the

danger she had been snatched from! His heart ran over with gratitude to Heaven, and acknowledgments to Henry.
No sooner was Gordon departed, than Sir Roger sent a summons to our hero, determined to discharge himself in some degree of the weight of obligations which pressed upon his mind, by an instant acknowledgment of him as the son of his niece, and every offer of an unreserved friendship in future.—"If then he demands my daughter," he said within himself, "can I refuse him the possession of what he has preserv'd? Cou'd I hold out against a claim so just, and drive him who has given her life a second time, into the like condition with that wretched maniac?"—Whilst these reflections occupied his mind, the servant he had sent for Henry, made report that he was not to be found, and indeed as he had not ventured upon an intrusion into Isabella's apartment, it is not to be wondered at that his search was fruitless. Here his presence was still indispensible, for nothing but the chearing sight of her defender, and his persuasive voice, could yet allay the tumult of her mind. Constitutions less strong than Isabella's might have sunk entirely under such a shock; the ravage it made in

her nerves was not inconsiderable, and great attention was necessary to prevent further derangement. Zachary, whose services were now in demand, of course postponed his journey, and paid close attendance upon his lovely patient. Silence and repose were the great and only restoratives in request; with this view a couch was provided in her dressing room, and on this was displayed the fairest form in creation, whilst at her side, in pensive mute attention to each breath she drew, fate Henry, whilst a servant, posted without the chamber-door, kept watch against disturbers of her slumbers. And now the gentle power of sleep had visited her senses, descending like the dove of peace with downy pinions on her troubled spirit; one glimmering ray of evening light scarcely sufficed to shadow out her form, and on this the eyes of Henry invariably were fixt, whilst he held her hand fast locked in his, careful to prevent the slightest movement, if it were possible, even of a fibre to awaken her.
In the mean time, the news had reached Doctor Sandford, who, in company with his son, instantly resorted to Hagley House: even Delapoer himself, in the adjoining village,

had received the alarming intelligence, magnified as usual in its passage, and he had also joined the anxious groupe of visitors to Sir Roger. Whilst strict order of silence was observed through all that region of the house, which was dedicated to Isabella, this groupe of friends waited the issue of her present repose with anxious hope, and Henry's praises were in the mean time the general topic of their discourse: even the modest diffidence of young Saunders was overcome by the warmth of their applauses, and he gave his voice to the chorus with peculiar glee; for he loved our young hero, and was beloved by him; he also, at humble distance, adored his lovely patroness, whose grace of giving had the power of doubling every bounty she bestowed, and Sandford's was the very heart to feel that grace in its full compass and extent.
Honest Zachary also joined the company; he communicated to them with cordial delight the favourable situation of his patient above stairs, wrapt in soft repose and guarded by the preserver of her life. He then expatiated very learnedly upon the dismal effects of sudden frights and perturbations, with the different modes of treating them, arguing

with great display of reason, that no one process was so efficacious as the sooting attention of some affectionate person best beloved by the suffering object. In the course of this discussion, the learned lecturer got himself so completely entangled amongst the fibrous ramifications of the nervous system, that after many fruitless struggles, and as many plunges into deeper difficulties, Zachary left nothing clear to the edification of his hearers, except that love was one of the strongest of the human passions, that the person best beloved was decidedly the most welcome to the person loving; that sleep was a grand restorer of exhausted nature; and finally, that it was his opinion, the young lady up stairs would sleep the better for Henry's sitting by her, and of course that his society would forward her recovery. To all these conclusions, there was not amongst the company present one single opponent, though Sir Roger, whilst he acquiesced in these general deductions, chose to make use of the word gratitude on the part of his daughter, in place of the broader, and, perhaps, more apposite term which Zachary had employed on the same subject.
There was indeed one person in company,

whom long experience of the fatal power of love, deep sensibility of its effects, and sufficient eloquence to have descanted on that topic, qualified to speak what would have been worth the attention of the hearers, had he been so disposed; but silence and sorrow seemed to have entire possession of poor Delapoer; still one ray of hope cheared the gloom of his ideas, and that was derived from the prospect now given him, by the declared attachment of Isabella to his son.
Doctor Sandford observed to Zachary with a smile, that he did not wonder if he had found some difficulty, in treating upon love, to preserve a due distinction of ideas, since it was an affection that shewed itself under so many symptoms and descriptions, being in some cases an actual disease, in others an effectual remedy. The medicines commonly applied for the cure of it, were too often ignorantly administered, and few fathers, he believed, were good physicians in their own families. "Very true," cried Zachary, "they deal too much in strong repellants." A deep sigh which escaped from Delapoer, not unperceived by the company, reminded them they were touching upon too tender a subject, and at this

moment, to their general joy, Henry entered with a chearful air, announcing the good news of Isabella's amendment; she had waked from sleep so recovered and composed, that he hoped all effects from her fright would now be done away—"Hold, hold," cried Zachary, interrupting him, "young physicians are apt to be too sanguine; old ones proceed with caution: we must not pronounce upon the cure as perfect, because the symptoms intermit."—Sir Roger submitted to this doctrine, and though impatient to see his daughter, suffered Zachary to visit her without him.
Delapoer now saw a fair opportunity of sounding the parties present, with regard to his wish of inhabiting the parsonage devolved upon young Sandford; he expressed his intention, with leave of the incumbent, to purchase the furniture and effects of the late Mr. Ratcliffe, reserving an apartment to the use of the said Mr. Sandford, assuring him that whatever he laid out, either in that or any other way upon the premisses, should remain to his use and benefit; and as his life would be retired and single for the rest of his 
•
ays, there would not fail to be house enough for them both, whilst circumstances remained as they

were at present.—"My motives," said he, "for wishing to end my days in this spot of earth which covers all that was dear and valuable to me in life, are known to Sir Roger Manstock, and I believe I may add, that any promises I engage for with Mr. Sandford, will be guaranteed by this young gentleman now sitting beside me, who, by deed of gift, is heir irrevocable of all that I am worth. To the head of my house, who, with the title, inherits every thing that appertains to it, I shall bequeath to the full amount of what I have received, my sword and my honour, both untainted and no worse for the wear. Of my great and early disappointment in life I will not speak, for the author of it is gone to his account, and the object of it, alas! is now no more. One wish remains at my heart, which, if I am indulg'd in, I shall pray for so much life as may suffice for the completion of it; if it is refus'd to me, death cannot come too suddenly. This I will now explain before the present company, hoping they will second my most earnest suit to Sir Roger Manstock; it is, that I may be permitted to raise some monument of affection and respect, to the memory of that beloved person whom we have lately followed

to the grave. I wou'd have it a mausoleum separate and select, and in some degree resembling certain edifices of that description, which I have contemplated with awful veneration in the East. I have mark'd in my walks about this place, a location, as I think, peculiarly apposite; and I have work'd upon a plan, (for architecture has been my favourite study) which I shall be prepar'd to exhibit to Sir Roger Manstock, when I have his permission for so doing. The workmen and materials are within my reach, the superintendance of the work will be my task, the last melancholy gratification that my sorrows will admit of."

A request so new and unexpected coming upon the worthy Baronet in this manner, embarrassed him not a little; he was at no time very quick at a reply, but now was more than ordinarily deliberate in arranging his thoughts. Indeed a suspicion had haunted him ever since his last conversation with Delapoer, that grief and disappointment had in some degree deranged his intellects, and this proposal of the mausoleum very much confirmed him in that notion; he therefore sought rather to evade the suit than to satisfy it, observing to him, that the manners

of the East were different from those of Europe; that in some few instances edifices of the sort he described had been erected in certain parts of England, but with an effect that did not much recommend them to his taste; a monument attached to a church he had no objection to, it had a local solemnity, and was seldom visited by the observer but at religious seasons, whereas a mausoleum built upon unconsecrated ground became, like other ornamental buildings in parks and gardens, a mere spectacle to the curious, and was rarely found to impress the visitor with any portion of that mournful respect, with which the founder of it might be supposed to have been inspired. Besides this, it was to be considered, that Lord Crowbery was still living; and though his insensibility towards the deceased, had been such as to devolve upon her kindred those duties and decent attentions towards her remains which properly belonged to himself, yet this would be an affront that could not fail to provoke his utmost rancour, and expose her memory to the worst insinuations. Upon the whole, he thought it a matter of no small moment, and therefore should not wish to decide upon it hastily. As for Mr. Sandford's

parsonage house, it was a question entirely for the parties concerned to settle between themselves, he could have no objection to oppose to a tender of so generous a sort.
The project of the mausoleum being thus adjourned, Delapoer retired with Dr. Sandford and his son, to negociate the treaty for the parsonage, when Sir Roger, finding himself left with Henry, addressed him as follows:—

"The service you have this day rendered me is of such magnitude, as no return of thanks on my part can sufficiently express, since there is no object in this world so precious to me as the life, which, under Providence, you have been the means of saving. You cannot therefore tax my gratitude above the value which I put upon your merits, and of course I must refer it to your own choice and arbitration, to name that favour within my power to grant, which will make you happy to obtain, if any such there is: consult your wishes, Henry, and let me know what it is I can do to recompence the preserver of my daughter."


"The first and greatest favour you can bestow upon me," replied Henry, "is the assurance of your pardon for the seeming duplicity

of my conduct, in keeping secret the affinity I have the honour to bear to you, and the presumptuous love that I have harbour'd in my heart for your adorable daughter. Obedience to the injunctions of a tender parent, compell'd me to silence in the first case, and nature over-rul'd the consciousness of my own unworthiness in the latter; for how cou'd I approach Miss Manstock, and be insensible to her perfections? how cou'd I see her and converse with her without surrendering myself up to love and admiration?"


"If my pardon," said Sir Roger, "be all you have to ask, you wou'd indeed name a very slight return for a very weighty obligation: but let us talk in plainer terms; by pardon, I presume you mean consent and approbation; when you desire me to pardon you for loving my daughter, I suppose I am to understand it as a modest way of asking me to give you my daughter."

Henry blushed and was silent.—"Why, truly," resumed the Baronet, "your diffidence makes a stop without discovering an excuse for it, for whilst you scruple to demand my daughter, you do not hesitate to secure her affections,"—"If such is my happy fortune,"

replied Henry, "the interest I may have with her is all the merit I can claim with you: to her then I refer my cause, in her is all my hope."

Here a message from Isabella to her father called him suddenly away, and cut short a conference that was becoming very critically interesting to our agitated hero.


CHAPTER III. Love is the grand Specific.
WHILST Sir Roger Manstock attended the summons of his beloved daughter, Delapoer had brought his business to a conclusion with the Sandfords, and had set out on his return to the parsonage: damped and deprest in spirit by the chilling reception he had met with from Sir Roger, in the matter of his projected mausoleum, he turned in his thoughts every mode his imagination could suggest for combating the objections he had heard, and as appearances towards the noble but unworthy widower, seemed the strongest and best founded

bars to his proposal, he brought himself, after long debate and meditation, to the romantic resolution of setting out forthwith upon a secret expedition to Crowbery Castle, there to demand an interview with the Viscount, and either by reasoning or other means, if reasoning would not serve, to return with such authority for commencing his operations, as should satisfy the delicacy of Sir Roger Manstock with respect to opposition from that quarter. Thus determined, he put himself in order of march with all possible dispatch, and taking with him a faithful servant in his post-chaise, left a note for Henry, simply informing him that he should he absent for a few days upon particular business, which he would explain to him at his return.
In the mean time Sir Roger visited his lovely daughter, and had the happiness to find her in a state of such convalescence as promised him a speedy and complete recovery. His conversation with her was tender and gratifying in the extreme, for he talked of Henry in terms of the highest approbation, acknowledging his obligations to him with a warmth of gratitude and affection, that encouraged her to throw off all reserve in speaking of her attachment.

To this, in the same strain of candour, he replied, that he had seen enough to certify the fact, which she confessed to, and therefore any attempt to vary from it would be highly disingenuous. It was natural, he owned, that she should be thus partial to a man so amiable in mind and person, and what must that heart be, he said, which was not sensible of obligations so important as those she owed to Henry? Far be it then from him to oppose her inclinations: with two such melancholy instances freshly impressed upon his mind, he should not risk the fatal consequences of exerting his parental authority to prevent her union with the man of her heart, so long as nothing could be urged to the impeachment of his character. But as time, which was both the friend of prudence and the test of truth, must now of necessity intervene before their connection could take place, he flattered himself, that in decency to the deceased, neither Henry nor herself would take means to shorten it by any abrupt determination: let the season of mourning run out its full date, during which he should impose no illiberal restraint upon either of them, no less confiding in Henry's honour than in her discretion.—

"My doors," he added, "will never be shut against the preserver of my Isabella, till I see, what I hope and trust will never occur, sufficient reasons for so harsh a measure."

To this Isabella made answer, that her recollection did not serve as to all that had passed, but she well remembered, in the midst of her terrors, clinging to the breast of her defender. "In his arms I sought for safety, and I found it; in that terrible moment, the impression of whose horrors will never be effac'd from my memory, he opposed himself to the raging phrensy of my assailant, and snatcht me from a fate too terrible to think of. Even now my imagination is haunted by visions, which nothing but his presence can dispel; when he is absent darkness falls upon my senses, with his appearance light returns; and shou'd he leave us, I shall never know happiness or health again."

The agitation which accompanied these words so alarmed her father, that he beseeched her to entertain no such desponding thoughts, but assure herself that Henry would continue where he was till she was in a state to travel, and should attend her even to Manstock House, if she wished it. With these assurances

she seemed pacified, and Sir Roger, willing to prevent any further irritation, took the opportunity of Zachary's coming into the room quietly to slip out of it, and retire in good time. Zachary soon perceived that her spirits had been disturbed, and wished to prescribe something in his own way to allay them, advising her at the same time to solicit sleep, and exclude all company from her chamber.—"Ah! my good Sir," she cried, "how widely you mistake my case: solitude is my terror; I know not when I shall be able to encounter it; I have a horrid image continually before my eyes, and no one but he, who rescued me from the reality, can fortify me against the shadow. Till I am satisfied that Henry is in the house, and that he will not leave it, I can never rest."—Zachary assured her that he was in the house, and would have been ere now at the side of her couch if he had not in the most peremptory manner protested against it.—"It is not to be told," he added, "what difficulty I had to persuade him to stay away from you."—"I hope then," she replied, "you will for my sake, as well as your own, never attempt that difficulty any more: why shou'd I resort to art, when nature tenders me a ready cure?

What I may be brought to in time I know not, but I have not yet lost my senses, and therefore dark rooms and soporific doses do not apply to my case."

Whilst she was yet speaking, the room door was gently opened, and a ray of light from one glimmering taper striking on the person of Henry, presented an object to her sight worth all the recipes on Zachary's file. The Doctor saw the change that instantly took place in the countenance of his patient; joy now illuminated her lovely features, the blood once more glowed in her cheeks, and Zachary exclaimed—"Well, my fair Lady, if such cures can be perform'd without the Doctor's help, 'tis time for me to leave off the profession; I shall begin to think that physic is mere quackery, and a dose of what the heart loves best worth all the compounds in the chymist's shop."—This said, he retired, whilst Henry approached with cautious steps to the lovely convalescent, gently taking her hand, which was held out to him, whilst she said—"Don't be any longer alarm'd about me, I shall soon recover all the unpleasant effects of this day's misadventure, and remember none but such as gratitude to my preserver have implanted in

my heart for ever. Oh! Henry, sure it was my guardian angel brought you to my rescue at that dreadful moment, and endow'd you with nerves to combat a creature, whose phrensy seem'd to furnish him with supernatural strength. How lost beyond redemption I had been but for you! Surely you will not leave me in this dismal place, where I can look on nothing but what revives the scene of my terrors: surely you will return with us to Manstock; it is my father's wish; 'tis my request: what says my Henry?"

To this tender petition Henry replied with equal tenderness, that he was her's, his whole heart was devoted to her, and that he was prepared to obey every wish of her's, though it should impose upon him the severest trial, and, not like the present one, flatter him with a prospect of the highest happiness he could receive, that of being allowed to attend upon her in whose presence only he could be said to live. Whilst he repeated this, he gently pressed her hand, which he still held to his breast, fondly regarding her with a look of softest pity and affection; a sympathetic glow of chaste delight beamed on her blushing face; her eyes witnessed the animating pleasure which these

endearments gave her; and when she saw him watchful of her emotions, and preparing as she thought to withdraw himself through fear of discomposing her tranquillity, she smiled, and said—"I perceive you have been tutor'd by our Doctor; Zachary has persuaded you that you ought not to be here; but he is no physician for the mind; and you, (Oh Henry! why shou'd I blush to own it!) you are the master of those springs which feed my heart with life and health; at your touch they move; in your presence I revive; when you absent yourself, they stop and relapse into despair."

Whilst she was uttering this, Henry was struggling to repress his transports; with difficulty he refrained from throwing himself at her feet; but recollecting in the instant all the danger of her situation, he checked the ardour of his passion, and with as much composure as he could summon on the sudden, reassured her of his inviolable attachment, promising to be ever ready at her call, attentive to all her wishes, and resolute to devote his whole life to her service.—"Only be compos'd," he cried; "let me but see this gentle bosom reassume its peace, and all these tremors vanish, who then will be so blest as I?"—"I perceive,"

she replied, "that you regard me with pity, as a being depriv'd of reason, and one who, according to Zachary's regimen, shou'd be kept in solitude and silence; it may be so, I am sensible I wander in my thoughts beyond the bounds of reason or discretion, for gratitude perhaps betrays me into too much warmth of language, and sensibility in the excess resembles madness; if so, I must submit, and you must treat me as my malady requires; still I will hope that your compassion sometimes will prevail with you to visit me in my affliction, and if you find that by your process my disorder is aggravated, not relieved, perhaps you then will think it time to try what contraries may do, and favour me with more indulgencies."

A deep drawn sigh, accompanied by tears, succeeded to this speech; her head sunk upon her breast, and she seemed surrendering herself up to an agony of grief, when Henry, no longer master of himself, and cut to the heart with her construction of his reserve, cast himself on his knees, and enfolding her in his arms, gave vent to all those fond and ardent protestations, which with difficulty he had hitherto suppressed: the act and the effect, like

those of electricity, were instantaneous; so quick she caught the sympathy of his transports, it seemed as if one soul had animated both, the gloom that hung upon her spirits vanished in a moment, her mind became collected, and joy diffused smiles over her beauteous countenance. Such was the magical transmutation love wrought in the mind and person of our fair heroine! To follow them in their conversation any further is a task we shall not undertake; the language of lovers is apt to be too broken and desultory for regular detail, and their imaginations a little too volatile for sober history; there is also more of action in these scenes than can well be brought into description, and if attempted to be described, are they not open to misconstruction, which might wound the purity so characteristic of those persons, for whose honour we are truly zealous? Let it suffice to say, that though love reigned in both their hearts, honour kept guard over one, and innocence was inherent in the other; respect tempered the passion of Henry, virtue herself might have acknowledged the sensations of Isabella.



CHAPTER IV. Rash Enterprizes are apt to miscarry.
WHILST Henry and Isabella were thus enjoying the blessings of a virtuous mutual passion, Delapoer, the melancholy martyr of an unfortunate attachment, like a wounded veteran worn out in the service of an ungrateful master, was pursuing his pensive progress towards the habitation of the Viscount. Deep and dreary were his meditations by the way, and not one word escaped him to the humble companion of his journey: his mind continually pondered upon the object of his expedition, and various were the speeches he compounded and decompounded for the event of their meeting. In all these resentment was a prevalent ingredient, and the bitter drug of an inveterate aversion to the worthless possessor of his lost and lamented treasure, tainted every composition he devised. Nature had given him, together with a fair and comely person, a most kind and courteous disposition, but the cruel stings of disappointed

love had festered in his bosom, whilst his travels and campaigns in an unhealthy climate had hastened on a premature old age, and rendered him feeble and decrepid at a time of life when many others enjoy themselves in full health and vigour of constitution. We have already stated the condition he was found in on board the prize by Henry, and his rescue from that dangerous crisis: grief for the loss of Lady Crowbery had since preyed upon him in such a manner, as not only to reduce his feeble constitution in an alarming degree, but in some measure to impair his mental faculties, of which this chimera of the mausoleum, and the journey he was taking in consequence of it, were no slight symptoms: his thoughts, by dwelling perpetually upon one single object, rendered him strange and insensible to all other matters, and withal so vehement and pertinacious in the pursuit of his favourite meditation, that neither rest, nor food, nor the calls of health, could awaken his attention; and in spite of all the remonstrances of his faithful servant, he pressed forward on his journey, though he was evidently sinking under fatigue, and at the same time exhibited strong symptoms of a fever hastily coming on.

These indications were no longer dubious at the conclusion of his journey, and as his chaise entered the village of Crowbery, the delirium had gained upon him to such a degree, that he was no longer capable of giving orders to the drivers where to go, much less of executing the purposes of his expedition. The reader may recollect a certain public house on the village green, under the sign of the George and Dragon; this being the only house of entertainment in the place, thither the drivers conducted our travellers, and there they stopt. It so chanced that Ezekiel Daw was at this instant perambulating the aforesaid green, enjoying the fresh breeze of the evening, and his customary pipe, when curiosity led him to the alehouse door to enquire who the strangers might be; and probably the idea that his friend Henry would be found in the chaise had a share in that curiosity, for sure enough the thoughts of that good creature were at that very time employed in meditating upon our hero, whose absence his kind heart very seriously regretted.
Delapoer was still in the chaise, and Martin his servant in great distress how to dispose of him, when Ezekiel coming up to the door,

discovered the person of the reputed Mr. Smith, and no sooner heard, and indeed saw, the sad state he was in, than with the compassion natural to him, he claimed acquaintance with the wretched invalid, and immediately directed the drivers to conduct him to the house of Susan May, where he promised him a kind reception, and all possible care and attention proper for his situation. This was gladly accepted by Martin on the part of his master, and executed without delay. Ezekiel strode across the green with such speed, that he was at Susan's door, and had warned her of what was coming, before the carriage got round and drove up to the gate. Benevolence, that glowed in Ezekiel's bosom, was no less warm in those of Susan and her mother; at the call of pity both parties turned out upon the instant, and as the chaise stopt, both with the same hospitable voice welcomed the arrival of their distressed and sickly guest. Whilst the women prepared a bed for him, Martin and Ezekiel lifted him out of the chaise, and with the aid of a proper cordial from the store-closet of Dame May, saved him from a fainting fit.
As soon as they had got him into bed, and

provided all things necessary for his comfort and accommodation, Ezekiel advanced to the bed side, and having felt his pulse with due solemnity and deliberation, drew Martin aside, and in a low voice said—"Of a truth, friend, I discover very ugly tokens of a febrile quality in the pulse of this poor gentleman, to whom I presume you stand in near degree of friendship or affinity, seeing you have exhibited proofs of so much care and solicitude about his person."—Martin replied, that he was the gentleman's servant, but no less attached to him than if he had the honour of being his relation.—"Be it so! be it so!" quoth Ezekiel, "there is honour due unto all men, who fulfil the duties of the station they are in, however humble it may be; and I perceive thou art not one that contenteth himself with eye-service only, as some are too apt to render. Let that pass therefore, and to the point, which being no less important than that of the life or death of a fellow creature, demandeth brevity and quick dispatch. I have myself a smattering in the medical art (I speak humbly as becometh me) having been early train'd to wield the pestle, and compound the drugs of a country practitioner of no mean

note; but I presume not to undertake a case of such danger and difficulty, as I much fear this will be attended with; at the same time I know not whither to resort for better advice in this pressing emergency, for the Aesculapius of our parish is absent at this present, and the substitute, who officiates in his stead, Alexander Kinloch by name, warrants not any great eulogium from me, seeing I cannot witness to the success of his practice in general; in candour I wou'd say more, if in conscience I was not check'd from uttering an untruth; had Alexander Kinloch been a cobler or a butcher, I wou'd perhaps strain a point to recommend a neighbour, but in the skill of the physician depends the safety of the patient, and therefore it is that I speak not in his praise: to be short, he is a very self-conceited shallow fellow, wilful as a mule, and ignorant as an ass, and woe betide the sick that comes under his care; where he enters, death is at the door!"


"What then is to become of my poor master," replied Martin, "if this is all he is to look to? Have you no physician within reach?"—"We have had Doctors in the neighbourhood," said Ezekiel, "but our country

is so healthful, that it has starv'd them all out: in fact, there is little or no employ for any but bone-setters and man-midwives. Therefore, if I may advise, we will let nature have her course for this night, which with good nursing, and the attention of these kind women, we may hope will pass well with our patient, and to morrow we will consult what more may be done for Mr. Smith's relief and accommodation."—"Smith, did you say?" demanded Martin, "my master's name is Delapoer, the Honourable Henry Delapoer, son of the late Lord Pendennis, and brother to the present; a gentleman of noble family and great fortune, acquir'd with high reputation and long services in the East Indies."—"Say you so! say you so!" interposed Ezekiel.—"And be assur'd," added Martin, "he is not a man to let these your kind offices go unrewarded, if he lives to come to a sense of them: my master (Heaven preserve him!) is of a noble spirit, and lets nobody serve him for nothing,"—"What tell you me of his spirit," cried the preacher, drawing himself up into the stiffest of all human attitudes; "there be others, who have as much spirit as your master, and who will not allow of any recompence

to be made for the common offices of hospitality and humanity, which they have both the mind and the means to deal to those who stand in need of their assistance; but I excuse these sentiments in you, which, had they been sooner made known to me, I shou'd not have mistaken your condition as I did."—Here Martin finding he had roused the pride of his host, began to make apologies, which he had no sooner done, than the spirit of the good creature was instantly allayed, and with many friendly expressions, and a hearty shake by the hand, he assured him every idea of offence was totally done away; and as he felt, perhaps, that more resentment had been shewn than the occasion warranted, he set about to qualify appearances, by telling Martin that there was not a man in the kingdom less irritable or captious than himself; every body that knew him could witness that his patience and forbearance were notorious to a proverb, so long as his motives were rightly understood; but as to them, he presumed every well-meaning man was naturally and laudably sensitive; for to do eye-service to God, and take wages of Mammon, was to make a stalking-horse of religion, and, in his opinion, a

a most heinous and despicable piece of hypocrisy.
Ezekiel Daw had now sufficiently developed his own character for Martin no longer to mistake it, so that having heard this harangue without returning any answer, peace was effectually re-established, and the features of the apostle relaxed from their rigidity. He then proceeded to enquire what friends or relations Mr. Delapoer might have in those parts, whom it might be proper to apprise of his situation, or if none such were at hand, what particular call he might have to the village of Crowbery, which caused him to travel with such speed and perseverance, to the sensible neglect of his health. To this Martin replied, that he concluded it was business of no small importance, which brought his master to that place; but the particular nature of it he was not informed of; however, he understood so much from what had escaped him by the way, as to believe it had reference to the Lord Crowbery in person, with whom his master seemed very eager to have an interview.—"Enough said," quoth Ezekiel; "his business lieth with the Lord Viscount at the castle, and his speed betokeneth the momentous nature

of that business: I do recognize his person heretofore in these parts, when he pass'd himself upon me under the name of Smith: there is a mystery at the bottom, that I am not curious to pry into: nevertheless, friend, it seemeth right unto me, that the Lord Viscount should be appris'd of his arrival, and also of the malady, with which it hath pleased God to visit him, that so the aforesaid Lord Viscount may aid and assist us in this extremity with his counsel, and thereby lighten our responsibility in case your master shou'd die, which truly I do greatly fear will be the case."

Having so said, and no opposition being made on the part of Martin, Ezekiel stalked away, and with hasty strides bent his course towards the castle.


CHAPTER V. Bellum, Pax rursum.
THE party we left at the castle, consisting of Claypole and his niece, with the Lord of the mansion, had passed their time in

their accustomed retirement, and received no addition to their number from the curiosity or civility of their neighbours, for the unsocial qualities of the Viscount were well known to all the gentry round about him, and none of them loved or respected him sufficiently to pay him an uninvited visit. Amongst the various causes in nature, which tend to corroborate or impair an attachment, we are not curious to search for that particular motive which had operated to the evident abatement of his Lordship's passion for Miss Fanny, but so it was, that his ardour had considerably cooled of late, so as to excite some uneasy sensations in the mind of the sagacious uncle, and at certain times emotions of indignation and resentment in the tender bosom even of the lady herself. Perhaps it would have been prudent in this fair creature, whose personal charms were her chief, if not her only, recommendation, to have husbanded that resource with a little more oeconomy; but as her uncle had on his part been as prodigal of advice; as she had been of favours, it may be presumed he overacted his part, so as to force her into measures directly contrary to what he recommended. Certain it is, that she did not love

the Lord Crowbery, and therefore we may conclude some passion stood proxy for inclination in her connection with that personage; whatever this was, she followed it as a guide to matrimony, though by so doing she very much dissented from her uncle's policy, who frequently objected to her in the vulgar phrase of the common saying, that she had put the cart before the horse.
It so happened, that whilst Ezekiel was on his way to the castle, meditating as he walked on the address with which he purposed to introduce himself and his business to the noble Viscount, a tête-à-tête between his Lordship and Miss Fanny had taken place, in which some litle asperity had mixed with matters of a sweeter quality, that young lady having taken occasion to inquire of his Lordship, what precise time he had fixed for making good his promises, by presenting her with a coronet, hinting in modest terms, that this was reasonably to be looked for before she returned the favour, by presenting him with an heir. Amongst various excuses which the Peer had ready at hand to palliate his delay, the recent death of his lady was insisted on in a manner that provoked Miss Fanny to advance a few truths upon the meanness of hypocrisy; after

so public a breach, she observed, between him and Lady Crowbery, the world could not expect even the semblance of sorrow on his part; that if he had meant to treat her memory with respect, how came it to pass that he failed to shew it to her remains, but consigned them to her uncle for burial? She could not therefore regard his plea of her recent death in any other light than as a palpable pretence to evade an act of honour and justice, which it would be more manly in him to disavow at once, and boldly face the consequences of his breach of faith, than meanly fritter away both her time and patience with apologies and excuses that were as frivolous as they were false. And what was this Lady Crowbery, for whom he held himself thus bound to sacrifice to appearances? Upon what terms did they live? In what temper did they part? Did he stir one foot from his door to accompany her on her way, when she departed from his house a dying woman? Had he any love, or respect, or even pity in his heart towards her, then was the time to shew it; but it was notorious he had not; and it was also as well known who had; it was no secret to her at least, that Henry the adventurer was the object of her fondest

affection; that he embarked on board Captain Cary's ship for no other purpose but to give her the meeting at Lisbon; that when that undertaking failed, and illness stopt her short at Falmouth, there he joined her, there he renewed those uninterrupted attentions, which cheered her dying moments, and in his arms she fondly breathed out her last expiring sigh.—"Damnation! Madam," he exclaimed, "do you think I have no feelings, that you sport with them so unmercifully? Do you think I have no sense of honour, of revenge? Can you suppose that villain shall escape my vengeance? And is this a time to talk of marriage?"—"Say, rather," she replied, "is this a wife to mourn for? As for revenging yourself upon her favourite, if that be your serious pursuit, no fear but you will find it; Henry is not a man to avoid an open enemy; if your Lordship has the spirit, he will give you the opportunity."—"'Sblood! Madam, do you doubt my spirit?"—"Till I have better proof of your honour, I do doubt your spirit; but as I am persuaded Henry will soon return to these parts, your Lordship may soon put that matter out of question, though I shou'd rather think your first discussion ought to be with

your Lady's first love, Mr. Delapoer, who I understand to be returned to England, fraught with the treasures of the East, and loud in his invectives against you."


"Against me," cried the Peer, sensibly alarmed: "what has Mr. Delapoer to do with me? Because he thought fit to run away with her before marriage, am I to be call'd to account by him after her death? If I am to fight my way through all her lovers, I had need have more lives than one for the undertaking. By the alacrity you express in numbering up my opponents, I shou'd almost suspect you took pleasure in my danger."—To this she calmly replied, "I only warn you of your danger, my Lord, which is the office of a friend, and trusting to your courage, take an early opportunity of putting you upon your guard. I have a correspondent who has inform'd me of some particulars that perhaps you are unappris'd of; I am told that Mr. Delapoer had a meeting with your Lady at Falmouth, and that he paid the closest and fondest attendance upon her in her last illness; I hear also that he was present at her funeral, and remains inconsolable for her death; I further understand, that he speaks of you with

less respect than any man of spirit will permit his character to be spoken of; in short, my Lord, I shou'd not wonder if a man, whose blood is fir'd with the heats of India, and who avowedly imputes to you the death of the object so dearly lov'd, and so deeply lamented, shall be sound capable of any measures, how violent soever, or how rash: nay, truly it wou'd not much surprise me to hear his name announc'd to you this very evening, as my servant tells me there has been a chaise and four post-horses arriv'd in the village not an hour ago, and that the travellers were receiv'd into the house of Susan May, which, in your late friend Blachford's time, wou'd hardly have been open'd to visitors at that hour, and of that description."—Whilst Miss Fanny was thus speaking, the visage of Lord Crowbery became ruefully aghast; he struggled for words, but passion and pride stopt what fear and cowardice would have dictated. At last, after many efforts and much ridiculous gesticulation, he made shift to mutter out a few broken sentences, by which nothing was to be understood, but that he believed she was in a league with these assassins to attempt his life.

With a smile of ineffable contempt, she replied, "I am not in any league against your life, for if I am injur'd, I know how to redress myself against the villain who betrays my confidence and violates those promises he has employ'd to seduce my virtue. Let such a faithless wretch tremble at my vengeance; defenceless as I may seem to be, I have a spirit that will not stoop to infamy, and a hand that can execute the merited punishment on the defiler of my virgin honour."

This ranting menace, uttered with all the emphasis of a tragedy-heroine, might have lost its effect at any other time than the present, when his Lordship's nerves were very much deranged from various causes; but now it was heard with terror; and when she rose from her seat with becoming dignity to make her exit, the spiritless and quivering lover earnestly requested her not to leave him in anger, for that he was ready to obey her wishes, and give her every possible proof of his love, honour, and good faith. This atonement made her features soften into kindness, and whilst she tendered him her hand in token of forgiveness, she declared herself ready to stand by him in

all difficulties and dangers, and make common cause against every impertinent that should offer to annoy him.


CHAPTER VI. An humble Visitor meets a haughty Reception.
THE terms that fear extorts, cunning commonly finds means to evade. Lord Crowbery had all the disposition in life to extricate himself from his embarrassments with Miss Fanny, and all the regret that heart could feel for having rashly involved himself in them. The peace he had patched up was of course a dubious one, but at the present moment it was convenient.
A servant how entered the room, and reported to his Lord, that Ezekiel Daw was in waiting, and requested to be admitted upon business of importance. It was one of those ill-timed strokes that take a man in the moment of his weakness. My Lord might certainly have refused admission to a poor neighbour of Daw's condition, but Miss Fanny

had instantly given her voice in the affirmative, and for him to revoke it was to subject himself to greater inconveniencies than his confirming it might lead to. It is probable that the idea of Delapoer rushed upon his mind, when he heard the name of Ezekiel Daw; but a thousand other trifling matters might occur to bring that good apostle to his door, who was ever busy in the interests of his poor neighbours, and forward to stand forth as their advocate with the rich and mighty. Having therefore put the previous question of "What does the fellow want with me?" and received for answer from the servant, that Daw would not communicate his business; the cautious Peer directed his message first to Mr. Claypole, desiring the favour of his attendance, and then permitted him to tell Ezekiel that he would see him for a few moments. In consequence of these orders, the Reverend Mr. Claypole and the untitled field-preacher entered the audience-chamber, where sate the lord of the castle and his lady elect, nearly at the same moment.
Ezekiel made his reverence, and was told to deliver himself of his business in as few words as possible. "I doubt not," replied

the preacher, "that time is precious to your Lordship, who so well knows the uses of it; and I shall therefore intrude no further on your patience, than a brief recital of my motives for soliciting the honour of this audience will of necessity involve. Benevolence, my Lord, as this Reverend Divine can testify, is a virtue which—"—"We do not wish to hear you expatiate upon," said Claypole, interrupting him; "let brevity for once be your virtue, Ezekiel Daw, or patience will not be our's, and you will be dismiss'd without a hearing."—"Reverend Sir," replied Ezekiel, "I will be brief, and not put any virtue of your's to a trial, that might perchance be too hard for it. This is my business—A traveller hath this evening arriv'd in our village, who now sojourneth at the house of Susannah May, of whose coming I held it as my duty to advertise the Lord Viscount Crowbery."—"And what is that to me?" cried the Peer, sensibly alarmed.—"My Lord," replied Daw, "I humbly conceive it is so far forth appertaining to you, forasmuch as the gentleman, whose name is Delapoer, a person as it seemeth of high birth and noble family, incontinently seeketh your Lordship, upon business peradventure

of no slight importance, seeing he hath travell'd with unremitting speed, to the great detriment of his health, and at the imminent peril of his life; which, if I have any skill in prognostics, now draweth fast to a conclusion."

At the name of Delapoer my Lord turned pale, and was visibly in great perturbation: the information with which Ezekiel concluded his speech, was of a more welcome sort. Rallying his spirits, he assumed a haughty tone, and demanded of the preacher, if he knew the nature of the business that Delapoer pretended to have with him. To this it was replied, that he knew it not, nor was the poor gentleman himself in a condition to make it known, having arrived in a high state of fever, which had seized his brain, and deprived him of his senses.—"And where are your senses," said Claypole, who knew enough of Delapoer's story to unravel the whole mystery, "to come on such an errand? What has my Lord Crowbery to do with Mr. Delapoer and his delirium? Let Kinloch, or Dame May, or any other old woman of the place (yourself for instance) put a blister on his head, or nurse your patient after any other fashion you think

fit; we have neither doctors, surgeons, nor apothecaries in this family: I am astonish'd you have the assurance to intrude yourself upon his Lordship and the company present with such a tale."—"If I am guilty of an indecorum in coming hither," said Ezekiel, "I should expect your Reverence wou'd be the first to find pardon for my error, seeing it can spring from none but Christian motives of benevolence and charity. The stranger, who now languishes on the bed of sickness, might draw comfort from the presence of a noble person, whom he has sought with such avidity; and that noble person (pardon the presumption with which I speak it in his hearing) might seize the joyful opportunity of succouring a fellow creature in the hour of distress."

This said, and no answer given, Ezekiel made his humble obedience and retired. Claypole, who bore him an ancient grudge, did not spare him on the occasion, calling him an officious, canting, methodistical rascal. Miss Fanny, who saw her prediction verified so unexpectedly, kept her eyes upon the Peer, secretly enjoying his confusion, whilst he maintained a sullen silence, persuaded that the

whole had been a plot of her devising, and more than ever determined to escape out of her hands: for this purpose, he soon retired to his library for meditation, where it occurred to him to write to his cousin Captain Crowbery, whose assistance he foresaw would be necessary to him on many accounts, and on whose courage and counsel he could firmly rely. A short letter, requiring his instant presence, being written and dispatched, he found his mind considerably more at ease; and to cover his designs, carried himself towards Miss Fanny and her uncle with more than ordinary cordiality and good-humour. Claypole, though a cunning man in the general, was so effectually blinded by this finesse, and by the report his niece made of the result of her last altercation with his Lordship, that he considered her as Viscountess elect, and his labours crowned with success. He commended her very highly for her spirit, and observed, that fear operated on her lover's nature as the more powerful passion of the two; but no matter for that, so long as the object was attained, he would not quarrel with the means. He hoped Delapoer was not absolutely in a dying state, but of that he was determined to satisfy himself very

speedily, for he regarded him, under the present circumstances, as a very lucky instrument for quickening his Lordship's measures, which he should take the first fair opportunity of promoting, by suggesting a temporary secession from Crowbery, during which the knot might be secretly tied, and not only the appearances of precipitation avoided, but also the interview with Delapoer, that he seemed so much to dread: to these ideas Miss Fanny on her part very cordially assented,
When Ezekiel arrived at Susan May's, he had the satisfaction to hear that Mr. Williams, the surgeon, had surprized them with a visit, and was then in attendance upon the sick person. He had obtained his discharge from his ship, and was now come, upon Zachary's invitation, to give him the meeting upon the spot, and adjust the preliminaries of their treaty for the shop and trade. Nothing could be more critically fortunate for poor Delapoer, than the arrival of this intelligent young man, who had already rendered him such services, and made himself so acceptable to his patient. As for Daw, who esteemed Williams, and despised Kinloch, his joy was excessive; and it was with some difficulty Susan May prevented

him from rushing into the sick man's room to tell him so. In the mean time, a bed was appropriated to Williams in her house, that he might be near at hand and within call at all hours, for he had already pronounced upon the case of his patient as extremely dangerous. His applications however had such effect, that before the night was past, Williams had the satisfaction to see a change of symptoms, that augured favourably, and was recognized by Delapoer, with marks of joyful surprize and satisfaction. The meeting between Williams and Ezekiel was very affectionate, nor did his friend Susan fail to give him a reception perfectly kind and cordial. When he stated to them the object of his coming, they were rejoiced to hear there was so fair a chance of his settling amongst them, to the exclusion of Kinloch; and in truth Williams was deservedly beloved by all that knew him, being a young man of most gentle and engaging manners, in person very agreeable, and of a well-informed understanding, with every thing that could recommend him in the line of his profession: at such times and seasons as his patient did not need his attendance, he gave the whole detail of his adventures by land

and sea, since he had quitted Crowbery; but in a more particular manner he recited every thing that had passed from the time that Henry had joined the frigate. This was the most interesting part of his story to Ezekiel and Susan, who listened with admiration and delight to the animated picture Williams drew of their heroic friend, and which he coloured to the height, with every warm tint that truth could give, or valour and humanity deserve. Whilst this was in relation, Ezekiel's glowing spirit would break forth into rapture and exultation; ever and anon he would spring from his seat, erect himself into a martial attitude, and thunder forth his applauses, forgetting sometimes his accustomed sobriety of speech, and launching forth into apostrophes of triumph, which, if they did not absolutely amount to a breach of the statute against swearing, were yet but hair-breadth escapes from the penal letter of the law. Susan's fine eyes meanwhile expressed the tenderest sensibility of soul, now dropping tears of sympathy, now glistening bright with transport, emotions that cannot be thought to have escaped the penetrating observation of the narrator.—"I

knew," exclaimed Ezekiel, in one of his rhapsodies, "that my boy was brave. It was I, and I alone, who first discover'd the innate integrity of his heart; albeit, he was then oppress'd under a cloud of accusations and appearances of guilt: it was I, and I alone, who stept forth in the defence of innocence, and oppos'd my single voice in arrest of condemnation, against a torrent of overbearing witnesses: this good dame, I confess, took pity on his corporal sufferings, and, like the charitable Samaritan, pour'd oil and wine into his wounds: I do not aver, take notice, that it was identically oil and wine which she administer'd, but it was something as good, and served the purpose she intended by it; the allusion is not less apposite, because it is not literal; Heaven will consider the mind, and not scrutinize the medicine. He was guiltless, and we rescued him; friendless, and we protected him; hungry, and we fed him; had he been in prison, I wou'd have come unto him even there, for my bowels yearned towards him in christian charity and compassion: and now, behold he is brave, he wieldeth the sword against the enemies and blasphemers of his

faith; he fighteth valiantly in the righteous cause of his king, his country, and his God. Who wou'd not do the same? who wou'd not die in such a glorious contest? I wou'd for one.—But out upon it! whither does my passion hurry me? Do I not forget myself? have I not a calling that warneth me from deeds like these? Am I not a preacher of peace?"

Here Ezekiel sunk down in his chair, confounded and abashed, whilst his lips moved and his eyes were turned upwards in secret ejaculation; which Williams observing, kept silence for some few minutes, and then, watching his opportunity, threw in a few consolatory remarks, by way of qualifying his self-reproach, which will be found, by those who think it worth their while to search for them, in the succeeding chapter.



CHAPTER VII. First Love sinks deep into the human Heart.

"I AM sorry, friend Daw, that you shou'd seem for a moment to retract the sentiments and expressions which my recital drew from you. What is so natural as to exult in the heroism of a friend? I protest to you, though my profession has no more to do with the actual operations of the battle than your's has, yet my heart glows for my countrymen, when I hear them applauded for their valour; and as to this action which I have been relating to you, though our victory was not great in its consequences to the nation at large, yet none cou'd be more glorious to the brave hearts who obtain'd it; in which, let me tell you, our gallant young friend distinguish'd himself in a most conspicuous manner. Had you but seen him, as I did, when he brought Tom Weevil to the cockpit to be dress'd, you wou'd have own'd you had beheld the perfect model of a real hero; such a countenance," (here he turned to Susan) "never in my life

did I look upon the like; why, 'twas what we may form to our fancies for the picture of Achilles; such fire in his eyes, but then it was temper'd with so much pity and consideration for the wounded object, who had indeed a most desperate cut across the cheek, that he had got in the boarding—."

At these words Susan shrunk back in her chair, and put her hand before her eyes, whilst Dame May eagerly demanded if poor Tom Weevil was killed, to which Williams answered, that it was a mere flesh wound, in no degree dangerous, and which was just sufficient to leave an honourable scar upon his skin: he then, addressing himself to Ezekiel, proceeded to say—"You, Mr. Daw, and the good Dame here present, have some experience of these matters, but you can have little if any conception of the horrid cases we have to deal with during the carnage of an action. Of this, however, we will not speak in the presence of Mrs. Susan, whose tender heart is ill suited to such descriptions: the virtues of Mr. Henry will be a more pleasing subject to her ears, and of these the catalogue would be in a manner inexhaustible." Whilst he proceeded to recount a variety of anecdotes to the credit of

Henry, particularly his humane exertions for Mr. Delapoer, who was found a prisoner on board the enemy's ship, and also his kindnesses to himself in the negotiation with Doctor Cawdle, he read the heart of Susan in her countenance, and perceived, that whilst he was praising Henry, he was recommending himself, for this her eyes declared with a sensibility that could not be mistaken. First impressions are not easily obliterated; Williams's soft heart had felt those impressions early in life for Susan, then in the first bud of beauty: time, that had matured her form, had improved her charms, and though there was something for delicacy to stumble at in the history of her adventures with Blachford, yet there were such mitigating circumstances to set against it, that he began to feel in himself a strong propensity to wave all refinements, and revert with ardour to his first passion. We have already said, that a more alluring person than Susan's was hardly to be met with; we may now add, that a more susceptible heart than Williams's must have been a rare discovery in nature; if therefore he was not easily revolted by small dangers, it was a consequence of his being operated upon by strong attractions. When

they were boy and girl under the same roof, every minute they could rescue from the duties of their service they devoted to each other; at a playful age their love was merely sport and playfulness; as time advanced, opportunities were more greedily sought, and more ingeniously improved; inexperienced youth is prone to curiosity, and the dalliance of the sexes is sure to be progressive; in the path of pleasure there is no pausing-place, upon which the foot of the novice can rest even for a moment's recollection. So was it with this fond pair; they had no Mentor at hand to break the spell; Jemima was herself no edifying example to Susan; Zachary was no rigid moral master to Williams; prudence was not the reigning virtue in Susan's character; self-denial was not the best attribute that Williams had to boast of: as their meetings became more delicious, so they contrived to make them more secret; still they were subjected to repeated interruptions, and the innocence of Susan was frequently indebted to the petulance of her mistress for its timely rescue: but fortune is not such a friend to virtue, as to work miracles for its sake; and if there is nothing but chance to save a poor damsel from

a false step, I am afraid there is but little chance of her being saved at all. In a soft and yielding moment, Susan's protecting genius being asleep on his post, and love alert and wakeful, Williams stole unheeded to her chamber, and, without the church's sanction, was admitted to all the privileges of a husband.
Furtive enjoyments are seldom less fleeting than they ought to be. Our lovers were soon discovered in their meetings, and the consequence was their instant separation. Williams went to seek his fortune at sea, and Susan staid on shore to bewail his absence: not that he left her like a man, who runs away from the mischief he has committed; on the contrary, he tendered to her every recompence in his power, but nothing cannot be divided, and the proferred indemnification was of course postponed till better days should enable him to invite her to a better situation. During the whole of his peregrinations, no rival ever detached his heart from its first love; he kept in faithful remembrance all his own promises and Susan's favours, anxious to seize the first moment his good fortune might present to him for fulfilling his engagements. Three

years had now passed away whilst he had been beating the round of service, with little other gain than of experience in his profession. He was now at the age of twenty-three, and Susan had scarce completed her nineteenth year, and within that period events had occurred, which stand recorded in this history, that in one sense favoured their union, and in another discouraged it; but the explanation Henry had given him of Blachford's treachery in the case of usan's seduction, had qualified his repugnance, and converted into pity what would else have been aversion and contempt. In the mean time, her personal attractions were improved by years, and his sensibility not abated by absence; the only struggle he had now to suffer was his dread of being thought a mercenary suitor (for the balance of worldly wealth was strongly on the side of Susan) and his discovery of an impression in Henry's favour, which seemed to him to be paramount to all things else in her remembrance. Of this, however, time and future observation could alone give him the necessary assurance; and in the mean while his attendance upon Mr. Delapoer would in a manner occupy his whole time, and be a sufficient excuse for his delay

in entering into any conversation with her, that might draw him into a premature discussion of what was passing in his thoughts.
Whilst matters hung in this suspense, the Reverend Mr. Claypole, impatient to be informed of Delapoer's real situation, and, if possible, to gain some light into his business, called at Susan May's, and meeting with Williams, was not sorry to hear that his patient was no longer in so desperate a state as was at first apprehended. As to the derangement of his senses, concerning which he was particularly inquisitive, Williams naturally told him that there was no mental debility in Mr. Delapoer, except what was incidental to his fever, and even that was considerably abated. Did he know, Claypole asked, what particular concern he had with the Lord Crowbery, that had brought him in such haste into those parts?—To this Williams replied, properly enough, that it was out of his line to pry into those matters; but candidly confessed, that he could collect enough from the rambling discourse that his patient would at times start into, that there was something on his mind of a very irritative as well as interesting nature; and it was much to be wished that some common

friend of the parties could seasonably interpose for the prevention of extremities. Claypole, rightly conceiving this to be pointed at himself, said, that for his own part he had no commission to enter upon the business; and being a perfect stranger to the gentleman above stairs, as well as to the motives of his discontent, he should by no means chuse to thrust himself officiously into an unwelcome office, but wait till he should be called upon, when his best endeavours, as a friend of peace, would not fail to be forthcoming. With this profession he broke up the conference, and returned to the castle.


CHAPTER VIII. When Parties understand each other rightly, Business advances rapidly.
IT was in the evening of this day, whilst Ezekiel was engaged with his pipe, and Dame May employed in affairs of the family, that chance threw Williams and his friend

Susan together in a moment, and after a manner so pointedly commodious for a tête-à-tête, that they must have been ingenious indeed to have found means of avoiding it, without betraying more disinclination towards each other's company, than either of them in reality possessed. The sick man was asleep; Susan had taken up her work; Williams was seated beside her; the parlour-door was shut, and the hour was sacred from interruption.
Susan kept her eyes upon her work; Williams directed his upon her; both parties were embarrassed, and neither could at once find courage to break silence. A kind of preparatory hum, like the tuning of an instrument, bespoke an effort on the part of Williams, this produced a responsive note in unison from Susan, who at the same time raised her eyes from the object they had been fixt upon, and guided them in that direction, as to clash with his by the way; a soft and almost imperceptible relaxation of the muscles, which none but a lover's sensibility of perception could have construed into a smile, struck courage into his heart, as an invitation to hope, and the words found way:—"'Tis along age, in my account of time, since we parted," said Williams.—"And

I doubt you have suffer'd a great many hardships in that period," replied Susan.—"Many people wou'd have thought them such," he rejoined; "but where the whole soul is engross'd by one over-ruling affliction, lesser evils are scarcely felt."—"That is true, indeed," she replied; "if such was the state of your mind, Mr. Williams, you might well be indifferent to small inconveniencies, when so great a sorrow possess'd you altogether."—"What cou'd be more afflicting," he said, "than the cruel necessity I was under of flying from one I so dearly lov'd? Trust me, my dear Susan, it was a heart-breaking separation, and that nothing but the hopes of establishing myself in some such way of business as might enable me to fulfil those engagements towards you, which I ever held as sacred, cou'd have supported my spirits through such a length of time; and suffer me to assure you, my sweet girl, that my heart has been steady to its first love through all changes and chances; it has been ever your's; and if I hesitate at this moment to convince you of its sincerity, it is because fortune has made your scale so much heavier than mine, that I might perhaps be thought to act from mercenary motives, an imputation

which I disdain and disavow from my very soul."


"That is an imputation," said Susan, "I shall never make against you. But alas! those very advantages I have gain'd in point of fortune must be regarded by you, who know my history, as insuperable objections to any views you might otherwise have had. An unmarried mother will never be your object in an honourable light; and neither you nor I have any longer the plea of inexperienc'd youth to excuse our frailties, as once we had."—Here she cast down her eyes, and yielded to a suffusion of blushes, that so captivated the enamoured heart of Williams, that by an irresistible impulse he caught her in his arms, and, in a transport of love, smothered her with caresses. A negociation conducted upon these terms was not likely to be very tedious between parties so tempered as Williams and Susan May.—"I protest to truth," he cried, "that the wrongs you have suffered from that villainous seducer only render you more dear to my heart, and more lovely in my eyes, inasmuch as they add pity to affection, and inspire me with the most ardent desire to stand forth as your defender against all the world, who shall

dare to breathe a word against your reputation. By my soul, Susan, if I could flatter myself that your heart was untoucht by any other passion, than that which I first planted in it; if I cou'd believe that no happier lover, superior to me in every point, had effac'd the impression I once made on that dear bosom, it is not all the injuries that Blachford, or a hundred such as Blachford, cou'd accumulate upon you wou'd hold me back one moment from your arms. No, no, I have no such principles by nature, nor have I learnt any such amongst my country's brave defenders on the sea, as shou'd induce me to desert the girl that has favour'd me with her confidence, because I found her either plung'd in the extremest poverty, or suffering under undeserv'd disgrace."

One of the kindest glances which Susan's fascinating eyes could bestow, witnessed the effect, which this gallant declaration had upon her heart: it was a signal of something more than hope to her happy lover, and produced no common returns of gratitude from him—but it has been more than once made known to the readers of this history, that we are no dealers in description; to recite what is said, so far, at least, as it refers to the elucidation of

events, is all that we undertake for; it must be left to imagination to fill up the scenes with action and dumb-shew. After an interval, in which, though the parties were silent, the business did not sleep, Susan candidly explained to Williams the nature of her attachment to Henry, giving him a brief but fair account how it arose, to what length it reached, and where it stopt; and this account had a farther claim to his entire belief, inasmuch as it perfectly accorded in all points with what our hero himself had told him in their conversation on the subject. It was natural that such a person as Henry's should attract attention; it was impossible that a nature so animated as Susan's should overlook it. But as honour forbade her to accept his hand, when the humility of his fortune might have tempted him to offer it, so the change in his circumstances, and the attachment he had formed, were now become such insuperable bars to hope of any sort, that all danger and delusion were totally at an end: it was clear that nothing had occurred which Susan had cause to regret, and that nothing could occur which Williams had any reason to fear. Doubt and mistrust being thus removed, and a mutual good understanding

established with absolute confidence in each other's honour, Williams renewed his former vows, and Susan scrupled not to confess her former liking: if we had the privilege of the comic poet, who makes marriages a momentary business, we would couple these lovers in those holy bands without loss of time, and the rather because we are not perfectly sure but that they ought to have been married, or acted as if they had been married; but alas! we historians are tied down to forms, and dare not do them violence, though they might not be so scupulously regarded by those, whom we have at this moment found occasion to bring together on the scene. Let it be remembered, however, in the way of palliation, that there is no moment so dangerous to female discretion, none so favourable to an ardent suitor, as that in which first love is renewed.
O Nature, whom alone it is my destiny to follow, when I attempt to paint the characters of my fellow-creatures, why wilt thou not always lead me through pure and unsoiled paths, in the way that I most wish to go, setting up a mark at every resting place for morality to steer by, and presenting no one object to my view but what throws a lustre on the history of

man, and reflects a bright example to that portion of posterity that shall chance to read it? Why wilt thou compel me to record the frailties of thy fairest works, thou mother of all nations? How often have I combated thy obstinate authority to the length almost of rebellion itself, whilst I have been persuading thee to acknowledge some unfriended outcasts from society as children of thine own! What is it I have not attempted, in my zeal to reconcile thee to the sufferers by prejudice? But thou art capriciously ingenious in devising models for thy academy, which are dashed with blemishes so cunningly interwoven into the very essence of the work, that he who aims to mend a part mars the whole. In copying thy productions, so faithful must be the hand of the imitator, that every blot in the original must be reflected in the transcript.



CHAPTER IX. Some People preach over their Liquor.
WHILST sleep was refreshing the exhausted faculties of Delapoer, and love in possession of the whole soul of Williams, Ezekiel's pipe was out, and his meditations at an end; the fire he had kept up in both quarters was burnt down to the embers; and as he was coming from the next door, Susan, who kept a good look-out against a surprize, adjusted her apartment, and put herself in proper trim to receive him.
O woman! woman! thou art a curious compound of sincerity and finesse, of candour and cunning; alert in thy resources when discovery threatens, feeble in thy defences when temptation assails thee! Love, thou art a traitor, an incendiary, a thief, on whom the hardest name I could bestow would be a term too gentle for thy unutterable wickedness: all the world knows thee, yet more than half of it trusts thee to their cost: though they call thee a god, it would disgrace the very devil

himself to claim kindred with thee. There is Susan, for instance, to whose virtues I would else have consecrated the fairest page in this immortal history, would have been a mirror of all human excellence but for thee, thou insinuating imp!

"Heyday!" exclaimed the preacher, looking her in the face as she met him at the parlour door, "what a change is here in thy countenance, daughter of mine! I shou'd guess thou hast some extraordinary good news to tell me by the liveliness of thine eye, and the lustre of thy complexion. Is thy sick guest on the recovery? Hath our friend Williams chear'd thee with the glad tidings of his convalescence? And truly he also doth appear very sensibly exhilerated. Why this is well, my children; this is as it shou'd be; this is the feast of the soul, which conscience serves up to us when it brings into review the good deeds we have been doing. This is the fruit of love, my girl, of that love I have often recommended to thee, as yielding the most rapturous gratification to the senses; joys, in which thou mayst indulge without stint or remorse: no fear, my good child, that thou shou'dst be satiated with these enjoyments, for they are

congenial to thy nature, they flow from thy benevolence, and in sharing them with thy fellow-creatures thou fulfillest the great purpose of thy creation. And thou, friend Williams, art a young man of goodly parts and endowments; thou hast done well in thy vocation, working the good work of love in conjunction with this hospitable damsel, and comforting her kind heart with the timely efforts of thy successful skill and experience in the secret powers and energies of nature, with which gift I do pronounce thee to be in no ordinary degree furnish'd and endow'd; and happy is it not only for the stranger above stairs, but for all our neighbours, that thou art come to reside and practise in these parts. Now then we will sit down and rejoice over the reflection of a well-spent day, whilst the good dame, our willing caterer, shall provide us a temperate refreshment, with a can of that mild wholesome beverage which our own fields afford: I envy not the vineyards of France, Portugal or Spain, I covet not their intoxicating, their adulterated draughts; a tankard of my own native ale, fresh, smiling in my face, and mantling to my lips, whilst both the senses of taste and smell sympathize in the

joint delight, is to me a treat which all the vats of the wine-press cannot compare with. Come, my child, let thy good mother replenish the pitcher, and we will pledge each other to the health of the poor stranger above stairs, and to the many and happy repetitions of this gladsome moment."

Thus having predicated, Ezekiel deposited his hat and staff in a corner of the room, whilst Susan glanced a smile at Williams so expressive and withal so sweet, that the muse of comedy, or thou her second self, inimitable Eliza! might have deigned to acknowledge it; then springing nimbly from her seat, she hastened to obey the social proposal.
Reader, to thy heart I dedicate this humble scene! Let thy fancy fill it up with all those pleasing images that creative genius can supply. Call forth thy benevolence, let every joyous particle that warms thy veins and sets thy heart in motion towards mankind animate the composition, and then thou shalt paint the dame with glowing philanthropy in her countenance, and the foaming goblet in her hand, entering the room, followed by the jocund miller, father of the brave Tom Weevil, and welcomed by all voices with the glorious all-hail

of neighbourly love and cordiality: see them assembled round the board, hand clasped by hand, lip succeeding lip in their salutations to the spirit-stirring tankard, whilst the triumphs of old England, and libations to the health of her brave defenders, circulated round the table, and whilst Williams recounted to the exulting father the gallant actions of his boy, not omitting to relate the circumstance of his wound, and the honourable scar he would bring home as a trophy of his victory and fame.
A flood of thanks to Williams poured from the hopper of old Weevil's lips, backed with hearty invitations to the mill, and congratulations upon his settling amongst them, garnished with many oaths and protestations of good will and zeal for his success.—"'Sblood! my dear Billy," he vociferated in his loudest key, "I wou'd not only be contented to fall sick to bring you custom, but damn me if I wou'd not even die to do you credit."


"Hold, hold!" cried Ezekiel, interposing, "swear not at all, friend Thomas, neither believe that the death of the patient can bring credit to his doctor. Die, if it be required of thee, for thy country's sake; die for thy religion, for thy faith, for the defence of thy

family, but in the mean time live for thyself and thy friends here present, and drink about for good fellowship."


"Aye, by my soul," quoth old Tom, "I shall be glad to stop a bit longer amongst you, for I have a heart for my friends, and thou art a true one, Zekiel, I will say for thee, and so is my dear Billy and the good dame, and my pretty pretty Mrs. Susan; damn it—"—("Hush," cried Ezekiel) "I wou'd fain see the scoundrel that dares wag his tongue to her disparagement in my hearing. Zooks! I wou'd soon clap a stopper upon his clack; and I hope I shall live to see the day very shortly when she shall be married to her deserts: a fair creature, friend Williams, and a dainty one, though I say it to her face, as ever the blessed sun shone light upon; is she not?" Here Williams nodded assent, and shook him by the hand, whilst Susan tittered and looked archly under her eye-lids.—"What!" continued the miller, "she must not live in this lone house, like a mope, when some good fellow may be blest in her arms, and have corn, wine and oil in abundance: why, 'tis against nature, and so the good mother will say, and so says friend Zekiel, for all he looks

so grave upon it. Come, Doctor, I'll give you a text, and you shall give us a preachment upon it. Increase and multiply."

Though levity of conversation seldom passed unreproved by Ezekiel, especially when it glanced upon sacred topics, yet it so happened that just then Ezekiel was in no disposition for reproof. The exhilerating tankard had given him a flow of soul, that would not suffer him to chill the gaiety of his companions; yet as far as Weevil's challenge went for a preachment, as he termed it, the good apostle was no flincher, and perhaps never found himself in a much better cue to take up the gauntlet.
Planting himself therefore in his oratorical attitude, with his thumbs tucked into his waistcoat pockets, and his fingers expanded like the claws of a bird, he gave two or three folemn hums to bespeak attention, and began as follows;—"When I revolve in my thoughts the wide-wasting ravages of death, I cannot but regard with gratitude and respect those prolific matrons, by whose labour of love the gaps and chasms in creation are fill'd up and replenish'd, which sword, pestilence, and famine are hourly making. Praise be to

their patriotic endeavours in an honest way, and much are they to be preferr'd to those solitary and sequester'd damsels, who, shutting themselves up in nunneries and convents, keep their natural faculties inert and lifeless, leaving to others of their sex to struggle under heavy burthens, whilst they go free and partake not of the toil. If all women were of their persuasion, the world must wear out like an annuity, and cease with the present generation; for I believe I may boldly assert, that no way has yet been discover'd by the curious in all ages, how such a consequence cou'd be prevented, if the fair sex were one and all to stand out, and no longer lend a helping hand to the work. Again, when I call to recollection, that before a single babe can be produc'd in the world, two rational free agents must be in the same mind to give it life; I am astonish'd there can have been through so many ages such a coincidence of sentiment and good will between the sexes, as to keep the work going; and more praise of course must be due to that party, on whom the weight bears hardest, which, if I rightly guess, is the woman. I speak under correction, my worthy neighbours; for having no positive experience to

guide me in either case, I will not take upon myself to pronounce from my own knowledge on the point in question. Tell me who can, for I profess it is past my finding out, to what secret cause it is owing that the population of this globe of earth is upheld. How comes it to pass, that there is no drawing back, no renegation in that quarter where the whole pain and peril of the task falls with such partial preponderance? When I reflect on this, I own to you I have sometimes trembled for the fate of posterity, fearing it shou'd be cut off at once, and the world dock'd of it's entail at a stroke: but when I look round me, and perceive how vain these apprehensions are, and that my fair countrywomen, for whom I have such fears, fear nothing for themselves, but carry the world merrily on, (and indeed in many instances with more haste than good speed, as the saying is) I take heart and believe, that as the hand of heaven set it a going, nothing but the same hand will stop it, concluding within myself, that when the commandment was given to increase and multiply, there was something given with it that makes up to those who are at the pains to obey it."


"You need not doubt it," said old Weevil;

and immediately Williams, who pretty well guessed how Susan thought upon the subject, started some other topic and changed the discourse.


CHAPTER X. Four Parties fairly matched at a round Game of Hypocrisy.
AT the castle, in the mean time, all parties were busily employed in plots upon each other. The Reverend Mr. Claypole made his best use of the intelligence he had picked up from Williams for alarming the Lord Crowbery, and grounding upon his fears his favourite proposal of a temporary retirement and a speedy marriage. His lordship gave him the hearing with all due courtesy and good breeding, but with no inclination to follow it in any other point but what suited his own purpose; as to quitting Crowbery they were both of a mind, but so far from turning it to Claypole's views of hastening the marriage, his intention was to employ it as the means of

totally avoiding it. Miss Fanny entertained her fancy in devising projects for post-matrimonial amusements; and in these it may well be doubted if his Lordship's honour and repose were the ruling objects of her meditation. Privileges of rank, extension of authority, and indulgence of propensities, attached to her constitution, had certainly some share of her attention, and had her system taken place, the wrongs her predecessor suffered might have been amply avenged.
Captain Crowbery, whom my Lord had summoned to his assistance, obeyed the call, and, having heard the case, acted as gentlemen in his predicament mostly act, and recommended those very measures which he found his principal predisposed to pursue. It was therefore resolved upon with joint consent, that it would be adviseable for his Lordship to take a tour upon the continent, whilst the Captain kept guard upon the castle, with full powers at discretion to get rid of Miss Fanny and her uncle, upon the best terms he could make; and here let it be remarked for the edification of my female readers, that those very steps, which Miss Fanny took to secure her conquest, were urged against her as the

first and strongest impediments to the completion of it.
This commission, it may well be supposed, was not in all respects the most pleasant to the undertaker of it, but it was attended with no small bribe to his diligence, inasmuch as in the event of his Lordship's death without heirs, the Captain was next in succession to his title and estate, and it was something more than probable, on the supposition of Miss Fanny's marriage taking place, that my Lord would not long be childless. The Captain was a man of spirit and address, not naturally disposed to put his hand to every mean unworthy job, but too good a politician to oppose his cousin's will, and not so much his own enemy as to have an unconquerable repugnance against serving him in a case like the present.
It is not to be expected that his coming at this crisis was the most welcome of all events to the uncle and niece, and it certainly required some management to mask the plot he had concerted against them. To Mr. Claypole he talked freely on the reasons of his invitation, ascribing them to the alarm that Delapoer's arrival had given to his noble cousin, hinting in no very distant terms at his want of

spirit, and acknowledging in conformity to his ideas, that the best thing his Lordship could do, would be to step aside for a time, and leave the matter, whatever it might be, to be made up in his absence by deputation, which, he observed, was indeed an unpleasant office, though he was ready to undertake it for the good of all parties, and the rescue of his kinsman's reputation.
This passed tolerably well upon Claypole, who knew enough of Lord Crowbery's want of spirit, to think it perfectly natural that he should wish to have the Captain about him, and as this gentleman agreed with his wishes in advising the same measures for a change of place, he saw no immediate danger of his schemes being traversed, and therefore continued to flatter himself that the promised marriage was in a fair train to take place.
Captain Crowbery had a part also to act with Miss Fanny, and upon this he entered with considerable advantages; for besides that her character was too open to be mistaken, and her foibles well known to him, he had the requisites of an agreeable manner, a good person, great powers of flattery, and a facility of assuming any species of disguise that might

suit his purposes. With her he put on a gay and careless air of a mere soldier of fortune, who considered her as the lady elect of the head of his house, and paid court to her accordingly. This so effectually flattered her vanity, that she seemed never weary of encouraging his humility with the smile of protection, nor was he deficient in humouring her with opportunities for the display of those graces so condescendingly bestowed. He had enough of that faculty of small talk to be sufficiently eloquent upon insignificant topics; he could point a compliment, or envelope a double meaning with all the readiness of a practitioner in that commodious art, and indeed he was not behindhand with any man of modern honour in the true principles of the sect; for he had courage to justify seduction, and gallantry to despise friendship, whenever the charms of a wife, of a daughter, or (which is more than either) of a mistress came in contact with his passions, and with opportunity to profit by: with these accomplishments we need not wonder that he succeeded in his efforts to lull the suspicion of a lady not over incredulous; and had his ambition prompted him to higher objects than a little inglorious

deceit, we may presume he would have been no less fortunate, for Miss Fanny seemed in a very likely train to overlook both his situation and her own.
His Lordship's preparations in the mean time, were put forward with unremitted diligence: as it was necessary for him to provide himself for his tour, and settle his remittances with his banker before he set forward, a journey to town became indispensible, and for this he had only to pretend the customary occasions of consulting his conveyancer upon the marriage settlement, and providing a licence, together with all other necessary appendages to a noble bride: These were pleasant tidings to the parties interested, and his Lordship's preparations were cordially seconded by the reverend uncle of the young Lady, whose interest was so much concerned in quickening his departure, that she seemed to have forgot the obvious compliment of lamenting it. There was a concurrence of circumstances, that made it in a manner unavoidable for his Lordship to invite Mr. Claypole to bear him company on this jaunt; it had its pro and con in point of convenience, but as it was no difficult matter for him to give that reverend

gentleman the slip in such a town as London, the offer was made of a place in the chaise with all seeming sincerity, and accepted with no other hesitation, but as to the point of decorum towards his niece, who in that case would be left to keep house with Captain Crowbery alone; but as this scruple was with himself singly, and not admitted by my Lord himself, or the Lady elect, who indeed treated all such out-of-date ideas with the contempt they merited, it was withdrawn almost as soon as it was advanced, and the engagement was made.

"I think," said my Lord to the Captain on the eve before his departure, "this business will be better manag'd between you and my Madam in the absence of the parson, than if he was to stay where he is, and make third-fellow in the fray: two to one is odds in argument, and Claypole is a plaguy proser, as I shall find to my cost, but I'll keep the wheels going till I have him safe in London, and then I'll soon bequeath him to his meditations: a fellow that has treated his own patron with such ingratitude, deserves no mercy. As to Miss Fanny, I don't expect you will find much difficulty in qualifying her anger, for as love

is out of the question, which of all passions is the most turbulent, you will have only to contend with a little dogged disappointment, and when she has spent her fire in abusing me, in which I give you free leave to join her, I predict that you will find her as reasonable and as flexible as you can wish; only let me escape from her talons, and I have little care what becomes of her afterwards."


"That's a happy indifference," cried the Captain, smiling, "and I can only promise you I will do my best to pacify her by every means but marrying her in your stead, which I suspect wou'd not altogether suit her purpose, and mine not at all."


"Ladies of her sort," resumed the Peer, "are not intitled to much delicacy, and in my opinion, merit little pity; so that you have full powers from me to use your own discretion, which, if it deserves the name, will never suffer you to fall into that snare she had spread for me. She has ten thousand charms as a mistress, but not one recommendation as a wife: the devil of a temper, and an unbounded propensity to play the devil with it; for whatever she may say to the contrary, I am in my own mind perfectly persuaded that she

dealt a foul blow to your antagonist Henry in the vengeance of her disappointment, and then pretended he had hurt himself with a knife by accident: therefore have a care of your ribs, George, for if you shou'd fall into the same fault as he did, 'tis a chance but you meet the fame fate."


"'Tis not just the death I shou'd chuse," said the Captain, "nor am I the man in the world to stand out like that young Joseph, against ladies who make love with weapons in their hands; I wou'd rather of the two, meet the favour than the punishment."—"Be prepar'd then," replied the Peer, "for if I have any guess, you are not unlikely to encounter the alternative: for my own part, I am clear in conscience, and shall die in the persuasion that I am neither the first, nor shall be the last in her good graces."

Here a gentle tap at the door announced the fair subject of their discourse in person. His Lordship in a moment dressed his face in its best trim, to welcome her with looks of love, and with all due regard to truth, declared that it was of her and her alone they were conversing, and that he flattered himself the tender instructions he had been giving to

his cousin would be punctually observed.—"He will tell you, fairest of creatures," said he, fondly taking her hand in his, "for he knows what place you hold in my affections: it is on your account only I submit to be a stranger to my own home for a time, but they will be heavy hours of absence from my charmer; and Oh! when we meet again—" Here his Lordship thought proper to be much affected, and his voice faultered, whilst the gentle Fanny acted all the ceremonials of a tender blush, which wanted nothing but change of colour to make it real, and artifice was thus repaid with artifice: meanwhile, a wandering glance stole its way by a sideway passage towards the Captain, who with infinite gravity of countenance respectfully liberated her hand, that was then held captive by my Lord's, murmuring in soft accents whilst he secretly pressed it in his own.—"Come, come, my lovely cousin, you must let me part these hands, so soon to be united for ever: scenes like this will only agonize you both."




CHAPTER XI. Breakfast Table Talk.
THE next morning our travellers started with the sun, whilst sleep held the bright eyes of Fanny Claypole in his downy fetters, and spared her the painful task of squeezing out a parting tear. At the hour of breakfast, she issued forth from her chamber, armed for conquest. We have already observed, that this young votary of the graces was in the art of undress eminently successful: on this occasion she had by no means forgot to employ that art in such a stile of studied negligence, as contrived to display her person in its most attractive points, by a seeming carelessness in those articles on which most care was in fact bestowed; and this we take to be the very first excellence, the grand desideratum of the modern toilet.
A pensive look, that had an air of sorrow for the absence of her Lord, was necessarily assumed, and the Captain could do no less than counterfeit a sympathising face of pity

on the meeting: now we have the experience of human nature to inform us, that when an agreeable young gentleman takes upon him to play the comforter to a tempting young woman in affliction, it is so much like making love to her, that he seldom fails to run one office into the other. The observation was not discredited by the case in point, for whilst Miss Fanny acted her part to admiration, the Captain sustained his share in the farce of hypocrisy with no less spirit and address: her sorrow was just enough to find occupation for his attentions, and not so much as to discourage him from persisting in them from a despair of their effects; in short, she was cheared, and he was flattered by the discovery that his consolation was not lost. In their conversation, which he took care to regulate according to the point he had in view, he did not scruple to glance at the character of his noble relation, in such particulars as might serve to pave the way for his purpose: he stood in admiration at his good fortune, in gaining the affections of a lady so beautiful, so young, and so worthy of a more accomplished lover: he was sorry to confess, but truth could not be disguised, that his cousin did not make the best husband

in the world to his former lady; in fact, his temper was not so good as he could wish, his heart was narrow, and his disposition unsocial and morose: a soul like her's, he said, wou'd find itself curb'd and confin'd by rules so rigid as he laid down: what were rank and title if they did not bring happiness with them? and who was there in the kingdom she might not aspire to? In short, if this was a matter of choice, he begg'd pardon for what he had been saying; if it was a match of prudence, he wished it might not deceive her expectations in the issue of it.
These insinuations, well timed and artfully introduced, had their desired effect; they saved Miss Fanny all the pains which hypocrisy would have cost her, inasmuch as they threw Captain Crowbery entirely on her mercy, and put his fate in her hands: had he been guarded in his discourse, she would certainly have been inexcusably imprudent to have trusted him with her real sentiments; but when he had so far committed himself on the subject, she saw no danger in meeting him with the like candour, and vindicating her taste at the expence of her sincerity, for she was ashamed to be supposed guilty of a real liking for so contemptible

a person as Lord Crowbery. Not discerning what motive he could have for reposing so much confidence in her, but that of good opinion and zeal for her happiness, she felt greatly flattered by the turn of his discourse, and knowing how absolutely dependant he was upon his cousin, and that he had been uttering words, which if repeated against him would never be forgiven, she said in a stile of mock reproof—"What a giddy thoughtless soul you are to talk this language to me, and put it in my power to ruin you with my Lord."


"If ever I deserve to be so punish'd by you," he replied, "I shou'd have no right to complain of being betray'd; but if without my deserving you shou'd think fit to do it, the necessity I shou'd be under of ceasing to esteem you, wou'd be the greatest misfortune I cou'd suffer by the event."


"That is very gallant, on my word; but why do you suppose I am the one woman in the world that can keep a secret; and what do you think you discover in me to trust me with your whole fortune?"


"Shall I answer that question fully and sincerely?"



"No," she replied, "for that perhaps wou'd not be to answer it favourably; and women, you know, are naturally fond of flattery. Don't you see what mischief I cou'd make, if I was wickedly inclin'd to it?"


"Whatever your inclinations are," said the Captain, looking tenderly upon her, "I wou'd have you gratify them, though my insignificant self was made the sacrifice; for after all, what am I but a soldier of fortune, and what is my fortune but the sword by my side? There is my subsistence, and that my Lord cannot take from me, or, if he cou'd, he dare not use it."


"Fie upon you," smiling, she replied, "you can't suppose but he wou'd use his sword in a good cause."—"He wou'd hardly be persuaded," rejoined the Captain, "to think any cause was good enough for that, I believe. He will never let it see the light in anger with his good will, else that young Henry wou'd have brought it out of its hiding-place, for he spelt hard to get a sight of it."


"That's a brave lad after all," said Fanny. "I have a right to say so," quoth the man of war; "and now this Delapoer, this man of mystery, hangs over us like a cloud: what

you may think of this journey to town, my sweet lady, I won't pretend to say, but for my part I must think, if all his Lordships fears were out of the question, there would not be much left for his love to boast of."—"Oh! you mortifying creature," she exclaim'd, "if I cou'd believe this, he deserves—."—"What!" demanded the Captain interposing, "what does he deserve? Not the handsomest woman in the creation, I will boldly say; not the transport of being wrapt in those arms, which were never meant by nature to embrace a coward."—"Well, well," she rejoined, "perhaps it is not the best use I cou'd put them to."—"What a pity then," he observed, "it shou'd be the only one."—"The only one," she repeated, breaking into a loud laugh, "surely you draw your inferences very nimbly, my good friend, but am I bound to make them good? Do you think that every marriage presupposes liking? Can you find no other motives for a connection between a simple Miss like me, and a titled personage like your cousin, but a preference that wou'd disgrace my judgment, and a passion that has no interest in my heart?"


"None, so heaven help me," cried the

Captain, "in your case I can find no plea for the sacrifice, and I shou'd think myself bound to congratulate you on your escape, if you was never more to see his face."—"Oh! you cruel monster!" she exclaim'd, rallying him, "wou'd you break my heart with the very mention of it? Do you suppose a married lady is without resources? is she therefore lost to all the world, or all the world to her? Are there no happy wives but what are in love with their husbands? Nay, let me put the question closer, are there no wives in love with any but their husbands? Come, come, I'll talk with you no longer."—So saying, she rolled up a pellet of the bread on the breakfast-table, and threw it at him in that pretty playful manner, as we have often seen it done by many a fair hand with exquisite address and good aim.
If a man knows any thing of modern breeding, he knows how to answer all attacks like this: the Captain made too much of it, for he swore it had wounded him to the heart; there was a little too much of knight-errantry in this, and he did better when he drew a rose from his button-hole, and gallantly tossed it into her lap, declaring that no soldier ought to

take a blow without returning it: he had done better still, if he had said nothing, for at best this is but the trick and pantomime of coquetry and wantonness. This is the time when wit is not wanted, and action takes the whole scene upon itself.
Miss Fanny, with the sweetest grace in nature, took the rose and placed it in her bosom, adjusting it with all that pretty difficulty of choice, that rivetted the beholder's eyes upon the charming operation.—"Blest flower," the Captain cried, "to what a paradise have I promoted thee?"—Then smiting his hands together, sprung from his chair, and turned to the window, as if to divert some emotion too violent for his controul.—"Come," cried the Lady, rising also from her seat, "we have talk'd nonsense long enough, let us take a grave walk in the garden, and drive nonsense out of our brains."

Her cloak was in the room, the Captain flew to reach it to her, and in assisting to put it on made so many awkward blunders, and was treated with so many pretty reprimands, that few cloaks perhaps have given room to more raillery, or been less applied to the purposes which cloaks in general are understood to be made for.

To the garden they went, and here we will leave them to ramble amidst shady bowers and love-inspiring grots, not the most innocent pair that ever took their solitary walk in garden or in grove, yet fairly matched in nature as in art, and fitted for each other. Whither they went, and what they did, we are not careful to recount; for though the justice of the historian should be equal towards all characters he is concerned with, yet he must be allowed to dwell with more delight, and expatiate with greater felicity upon the amiable than upon the unamiable; as far as these prejudices may be deemed excusable, so far I hope I may be indulged in them, and therefore I shall now drop the curtain upon this scene, as I have upon others of the like description, and close the eleventh book of this important history now hastening to its conclusion.

END OF BOOK THE ELEVENTH.



BOOK THE TWELFTH.

CHAPTER I. The Author's last Address to his Readers.
WE are now drawing nigh to the conclusion of our history, and if my kind reader has found amusement in his task, I shall not regret the toil and labour of mine. Great must be that author's mortification, who miscarries in a trivial undertaking; and certain it is, that small matters should never be attempted without strong presumption of success. Something there must be in every man's view, who commits himself to the press; and as all speculations upon profit are now becoming more and more precarious, there seems little left to animate the adventurer but a disinterested passion for fame: I think it is therefore to the credit of the corps, that we still continue to volunteer it with such spirit, that no abatement is yet discernible either in our numbers

or exertions. When I search my own heart for the motives that have operated with such activity upon me for resorting to my pen, I find myself impelled by a principle I am not ashamed of, since it has been uniformly that of doing every thing in my power for keeping alive a general spirit of good humour, and endearing man to man, by bringing characters under review, which prejudice has kept at distance from the mass of society; I have never failed to lend my feeble hand to their's, who are benevolently employed in recommending love and harmony to mankind: I love my contemporaries, and detest that language so much in use, which tends to sink the present age on a comparison with ages past; and as I hold this to be an illiberal and ungenerous propensity, I thank God I have reached that time of life when it is chiefly prevalent, and yet perceive myself more than ever abhorrent from the practice of it.
I must now send my hero into the world to shift for himself; I have done what I could for him whilst he was under my care, and have bequeathed him nature for his guide at parting. The trials and temptations I have exposed him to, are such as might befal any

person in his situation, and not greater than every man of steady principles, without any romantic strain of virtue or courage, may resolutely meet. I have not set his character upon stilts for sentimental enthusiasts to gaze at, but kept him on the plain ground with nature's common stock, studying to endow him with the patient virtues rather than the proud.
To my heroine, I have given as many charms as the reader's imagination shall be disposed to afford her, without being indebted to descriptions, which I reject upon conscience, having so often read them in other novelists with satiety and disgust; and I flatter myself, my Isabella will appear not the less attractive for the very few and slight demands I have made upon her health and constitution, not having been able to discover, amongst all the numerous examples of sickly and tormented heroines, any peculiar delicacy in their diseases, or much amusement in their casualties: in one instance only I have fallen in with the fashion.
I have kept my narrative free from the perplexities of episode and digression, and given the scene to my characters without any intrusion of my own person, which I hold to

be an unpardonable impertinence. Of poetry I have made no use, and of quotation so very sparingly as scarce to be perceptible. The incidents, I trust, are in no case improbable; and as to that combination of circumstances, which appears to criminate my hero in the second book, I have, since the writing of it, been told of a case upon record, which so nearly resembles it as to give my narrative the air of being founded upon fact in that particular, which in reality it was not. In point of stile, I flatter myself the critic will not find much to reprehend; but in that and every other particular I am fairly before him; let him strike with justice, and I will not murmur at the stroke.
And now, if this page shall meet the eyes of a certain lady, not less distinguished for her many amiable qualities than for her exalted rank, she will perceive that I have fulfilled her instructions, and composed a novel, to the best of my ability, in the form she recommended and prescribed. Uncertain of its fate, I forbear to make known whose commands I have been honoured with, content if she alone is satisfied with my obedience, and not entirely disappointed with the execution

of a work, which but for her I never should have undertaken.


CHAPTER II. The History goes back to the Hero.
THE sudden disappearance of Delapoer, and the state of mind in which he had departed, caused great uneasiness to Henry, and damped those joys he would else have reaped in the unrestrained society of his beloved Isabella, to whom every hour of his time was devoted. Her health was now so nearly reestablished, that Sir Roger had named a day for his return to Manstock, and that was now so near at hand, that Henry was alarmed lest the time should not allow for his father's coming back, and till that event took place, or some intelligence was obtained, duty fixed him to the spot he was in. He knew too well the resentful feelings of his father, and the strong expressions he had repeatedly thrown out against Lord Crowbery, to be at any loss to find a motive for the suddenness and secrecy of his

departure, and those conjectures were as painful as they were plausible; not that he apprehended any danger to his father's person from a supposed discussion with that unworthy Lord, for he had all possible contempt for his want of spirit; but it was the impropriety of the thing itself, and the unfitness of the undertaker, which struck him so forcibly, and presented so many unpleasant thoughts upon reflection, that he debated very seriously within himself whether he should not set out upon a venture, in the hopes of overtaking his father, and dissuading him from the interview. The practicability of this, however, was made more than doubtful by the time that had elapsed, before he had intelligence of Mr. Delapoer's departure, so that when he came to confer with Sir Roger upon the idea which had started in his mind, that worthy gentleman had so many good reasons to oppose against it, and his own maturer thoughts, prompted withal by an unseen advocate, suggested so many more, that he resolved upon waiting the issue of his father's promised return; till after some days anxious expectation, a letter from Williams to Zachary, written after Delapoer's arrival at Crowbery, put an end to all suspense

as to the destination of the absentee, but gave at the same time so alarming an account of the illness he had been seized with, that Henry, apprehending him to be in the utmost degree of danger, no longer hesitated what to do.
He had provided himself with two excellent riding horses, and Tom Weevil received orders for making ready without delay. The distance was little more than sixty miles, and it was his purpose, for expedition sake, to ride part of the way, but there still remained the painful task of reconciling Isabella to the necessity of an unexpected parting. This was a distressful moment, for though a heart like her's could not scruple to admit the urgency of the call, yet love and tender apprehension could not be made to accord, without anguish, to the disappointment. Neither was Sir Roger himself a disinterested party in the discussion of this unwelcome business; for when he saw the struggle it occasioned to the fond, yet candid heart of Isabella, he offered to set out the next morning with his whole family, if Henry would bear them company; but as Sir Roger's equipage was in the stile of ancient times, and bore not the least similitude

to a mail-coach, a distance of sixty miles was to him a journey of two days, whilst our hero's impatience did not mean to appropriate more than six hours to the road; a compromise was therefore struck upon by Henry, who engaged to come back and give them the meeting at the inn where they rested for the night, unless he found his father's situation such as to prevent it. This was eagerly embraced by Isabella, who, at parting from him with eyes full of tears, and a look of the tenderest affection, said to him, "Go, then, and may success attend you! Remember only you have that in charge, which is infinitely dearer to me than the life you have preserv'd."

His horses were at the door, duty pressed, time was on the wing, he snatched a hasty adieu, and, light as Perseus, or the equestrian son of Leda, sprung into the saddle, and was out of sight in an instant—"He is gone," cried Zachary, who, with Sir Roger and Isabella, had attended him to the door," he is off like a shot; 'tis a rare thing to be young and nimble; but after all, I'm afraid his labour will be lost, and he will come too late, for I augur ill from Williams's account of Mr. Delapoer's

case."—"Heaven forbid!" cried Isabella, "that any such unhappiness as you predict shou'd befal him."—"Come, come," said Sir Roger, "we will not anticipate misfortunes."—Then taking Isabella's arm under his, walked forth to give his orders to the servants without doors for the next day's journey.

"I perceive, my dear child," said he as they passed along, "tho' your life has been sav'd by your friend who has just left us, your heart is irrecoverably lost. It behoves us therefore to consider what you have substituted in its place, that so we may compute and strike the balance between profit and loss. If I did not think as highly of Henry's virtues, and predict as favourably of his temper, as an old man like me ought in reason to do of a young one like him, I shou'd contemplate my lovely Isabella's situation with alarm and terror; for tho' I shou'd not despair but my authority might prevent imprudence, I fear it wou'd not serve to extinguish love: it demands therefore all the prepossession that I entertain for Henry's character to bring me to acquiesce, as you may now perceive I do, in your decided attachment to him. I own to you, my Isabella, I once thought no circumstances cou'd have induced

me to favour a connection with him or any person under his predicament; but it seems as if Providence had decreed, that, in spite of all my prejudices, I shou'd be compell'd by the force of facts to be the convert of his virtues, and renounce my opposition to him. How strongly have events conspir'd to mark this out, since fortune first made him known to us by throwing him in the last extremity of distress upon the unexpected protection of a mysterious mother! What an escape had he from the murderous designs af Blachford, and the desperate rage of that infuriated wanton! What perils did he incur in the boarding of the Frenchman! and what but the hand of Heaven itself cou'd so critically conduct him to your rescue in the last awful instant, that stood betwixt you and a disaster too terrible to think upon! How singular was the chance by which I discover'd that posthumous and important writing of Sir Andrew Adamant, address'd to me in his behalf, and which seem'd to have lain conceal'd for the sole purpose of bringing it to light in the happiest moment for his interest and advantage! The very case of that wretched maniac, from whose hands he snatch'd you, had a moral in the history of his madness, that

applied itself to my conviction: but when to these I add, the very striking circumstances that attended his meeting with his father, and reflect upon his uncommon generosity in the case of Blachford's will, and again in that of Lady Crowbery, how can I say he is not deserving of your affection, or any longer interpose between him and the happiness he seems destin'd to enjoy?"

Here Sir Roger concluded, whilst his attentive hearer still waited in respectful silence; but perceiving after a pause that he now expected her reply, she turned upon him the most lovely countenance in nature, and—"Oh! my dear father," she said, "think not that I have been silent because I wanted gratitude for your goodness, but because I feel it to an excess that stifles my expressions. I trust I never cou'd act in opposition to your will; but I wou'd fain not entertain even a wish in contradiction to your judgment: had you therefore interdicted my attachment to Henry, I must, and I wou'd have strove to have torn him from my heart, terrible although the struggle would have been; but when I hear his praises from your lips, and receive your sanction to confirm me in my choice,

words cannot speak the happiness you bestow upon me, and if I did not sooner make reply, it was because I was loth to interrupt you on a subject I cou'd listen to for ever."

In the mean time Henry, thus ever present to the thoughts of his Isabella, proceeded briskly towards the destination where his duty called him. New affections had been stirred within his bosom by the discovery of his parents; but hard fortune, which had already bereft him of a mother, lost as soon as known, and beloved only to be bewailed, seemed now in the cruel disposition to deprive him of his father also. This and his meditations on the dear object he had newly parted from, were his companions by the way, and honest Weevil, who followed him, had full scope to indulge his own imagination without let or hindrance, till our hero, having measured more than half the way, found himself at the inn, where Sir Roger proposed to take up his rest. Here he left Tom and his horses, and having delivered to the master of the house the necessary instructions for the reception of his guests next day, he took post and proceeded with all possible expedition towards Crowbery.

The day had closed when Henry arrived at Susan's hospitable door, and was received by Williams with a chearful countenance, that bespoke the happy report he had to make of his patient's amendment. Delapoer had quitted his sick chamber, and was sitting in the parlour; great was his joy at the sight of Henry, clasping him in his arms and blessing his good providence, that he had survived to see him once again: of his obligations to Williams, who had now for the second time rescued him from death, he spoke in the warmest terms, and not less gratefully of honest Ezekiel and the kind women, whose tender care and solicitude had contributed to restore him. He confest the object of his journey had been a sudden resolution of seeking Lord Crowbery, in consequence of the objection started by Sir Roger Manstock, with respect to his projected mausoleum. "And what," added he, "might have been the consequence of our meeting, had it taken place, I will not presume to say; certain it is, that second thoughts and a calmer state of mind, have placed that project in another light from what it first appeared in to me, when under the impression of a recent disappointment: I have now renounced it, and

think it a lucky circumstance, that the wretch I came in search of is out of my reach, and gone from home to prepare, as it is said, for a second marriage with the niece of Mr. Claypole, now residing at the castle."


"Unfeeling, shameless profligate," exclaimed Henry, with indignation and astonishment; "will he so grossly insult the virtuous memory of his injured wife, as to plot a second marriage before she is scarce cold in her coffin; and with the niece of Claypole wou'd he marry? Is Fanny Claypole of all women breathing to be the Lady Crowbery, that so hastily succeeds to my unhappy mother? be it so! if he is so rank of soul as to set decency at defiance, let him couple with a fury, and may his passion be his plague! I know her well, and if Providence for his sins shall surrender him into her hands, you and I, my good Sir, may let our vengeance sleep; his punishment is provided for, the task is taken out of our hands, and the tyrant over others is his own executioner."

The evening was now in advance, and though Delapoer's spirits were greatly exhilerated by the arrival of his son, yet, in consideration of his strength, the conversation was not protracted beyond the time that Williams

thought fit to indulge him with; and nothing more occurred between them worth recording in this history.


CHAPTER III. A singular instance of a Journey performed by our Hero and Heroine, without one Casualty by the way.
AS soon as Delapoer had retired to his chamber, Susan May and her mother presented themselves to Henry, and were met by him with all the warmth of former affection. The good dame as usual was loquacious in her joy, and had many questions and enquiries to be resolved: Susan's sensibility was of a more silent sort, and whilst she greeted him with smiles of gratitude and love, the tear glistened in her eye, and the blush glowed upon her cheek.
Henry saw her emotion, and perfectly understood the cause of it, making a plea therefore of his impatience to see Ezekiel, he cut short the interview, observing, that the evening just served him to snatch a sight of his friend,

over his concluding pipe, before he turned in to his cockloft. He proceeded to the cottage, and opening the door without ceremony, discovered the rural apostle seated in his chair of meditation, with his back towards him, and too deep in thought to be roused by so quiet a visitor. Henry stopt and contemplated him for a few moments, with a placid delight: "Kind soul," he said within himself, "thy thoughts are occupied in benevolence, and thy communications are with Heaven!" Then going up to him, and putting his hands upon his shoulders over the back of his wicker throne, called upon him by name, to wake from thought and welcome a friend. Ezekiel started at the well-known voice, sprung from his chair, and threw himself upon Henry's neck: "Praised be Heaven!" he exclaimed, "praised be Heaven! I am blest above my hopes in embracing thee once more, thou child of my affection." He then took two or three strides across the room, rubbing his hands and crying out; "What wilt eat? what wilt drink? I warrant thou art fasting, fresh from sea."

Henry smiled at Ezekiel's want of recollection, and stopping him as he was posting to

the store where he kept his provisions, told him that the pleasure of seeing him was all the refreshment he stood in need of for the present. The good man now became a little more collected, but still ran from subject to subject, mistaking many things that he might have recollected, and repeating others Henry was already informed of; such as the death of Jemima Cawdle, the arrival of Williams, the reports about Lord Crowbery, and other anecdotes neither quite new, nor over-interesting in his relation of them; yet our hero had patience for them all, and in the end was repaid for that patience, by hearing that the wretched Jemima had, by Ezekiel's assiduous remonstrances, been brought to a due sense of her condition, and a better train of thoughts in her latter moments: what money she had scraped together, she bequeathed to her husband, and every thing in which Zachary was interested, had been faithfully and discreetly administered by Daw himself, with the assistance of old Tom Weevil the miller.
Ezekiel's spirits were now so thoroughly awake, that Henry would hardly have prevailed with him to think it was time to go to rest, had he not pretended that he stood in

want of it himself. He found his friends at next door expecting his return, and every thing set in order for his comfort and repose, that Susan's hospitable care and attention could provide.
The next morning brought Williams to his bed-side, with the chearing intelligence, that he could now with confidence pronounce his patient to be out of danger. His apprehensions thus allayed, he felt himself at liberty to make good his conditional engagement to Isabella, for which he made the necessary preparations. After devoting the whole forenoon to his father, and declining his generous offers of an immediate establishment, suitable to the heir of an ample fortune, he left him highly satisfied with the errand he was going upon, and much delighted with the happy prospect it seemed to open on his future hopes.
Relieved from his alarms about the friend he left behind him, and impatient to meet the beloved object towards whom his course was now directed, our hero with a joyful heart, whilst the chaise whirled him rapidly along, counted every mile that diminished his distance from Isabella. Sir Roger with

the punctuality that governed all his motions, had calculated to a minuteness the time of his arrival at the inn. It was a full hour before this given time, when Henry's well-feed postilions drove their panting horses to the door. His first care was to examine if the house was in a state of preparation for their expected guests; and it was with satisfaction he saw, that all his instructions had been punctually obeyed; when this was done, and the little derangements of his dress repaired, he found himself at leisure to make the proper enquiries after Tom and his cavalry: the brave lad soon appeared upon the summons, and gave a good account of his charge; he also informed his master, that part of Sir Roger's suite were arrived, and that the coach was near at hand with all well within-side of it.
At length the much-wished-for moment arrived, that brought the cavalcade in view, and Henry at the coach-door received a hand in his, whose touch inspired him with delight. All inquiries made and resolved, Isabella now, with Henry seated beside her, all her fond fears dismissed, and greeted with the smile of approbation from her beloved father, felt that transcendent glow of soul, which is the exclusive

property of virtuous love, and Heaven's best gift to the thrice-blessed few that merit it. No traces of her late disorder were any longer to be seen; her animated countenance beamed with such lustrous beauty, health and joy, as made it dazzling to behold. Henry gazed in speechless rapture; Sir Roger himself sate in fixed contemplation, and the very people who attended upon the guests, seemed to make errands into the room, for the purpose of treating themselves with a glimpse of the lovely stranger. Unconscious of her charms, until she saw them in the glass of Henry's face, she no sooner perceived the transport they excited, than she dropped her eyes with modest sensibility, and was covered with blushes.
Enraptured at the sight, Henry could no longer command himself, though in the presence of Sir Roger: "Pardon me," he cried, "thou loveliest of women, for oppressing thee with my admiration; and you my patron and protector, be my advocate so far, as to confess that her beauty is irresistible."—"Why in very truth, Henry," said the Baronet, "if you could look upon that form without rapture, I must think you wou'd not be so worthy as

you are of an interest in her heart."—"How generous is that apology!" exclaimed the happy youth; "how flattering to my presumptuous hopes! by Heaven, I wou'd go to death for the father of my Isabella!"—"You have done more than that for me," replied Sir Roger, "when you preserved my child: she is, under Providence, your gift to me; what can I do less than endow you with that blessing you so gallantly redeemed?"

The gratitude and joy which Henry now felt, were not to be expressed by words; his first impulse was to throw himself at Sir Roger's feet: a motion on the part of that gentleman, which forbade the attempt, and a certain look, which reminded him of the place he was in, brought him to instant recollection; yet he seized his hand with ardour, and pressed it to his lips: Isabella's beauteous and blushing countenance in the mean while took a deeper tint; she too like Henry was silent. The good Baronet understood enough of nature to interpret rightly for both parties, and accordingly took an early occasion to relieve their sensations, by starting some topic more apposite to the place they were in; but a more effectual stop was soon put to all conversation

on this subject, by the preparations for supper, and the bustle those manoeuvres never fail to produce amongst the waiters of an inn. The joy, however, which our hero now experienced, was too discoverable to be overlooked by her who was the cause of it: how far her own sensations accorded with it, was only to be guessed at by the sagacity of a lover; for modest timidity kept in check all emotions that might lead to observation, and nature only shewed herself in a complacent smile, and now and then a tender glance, that escaped as it were involuntarily and by surprize.
Sir Roger, meanwhile, was in high good-humour with every body and every thing: exercise had given him appetite, and he had a heart to partake of the happiness he had bestowed; he declared his entertainment to be excellent, chatted familiarly with the landlord, praised his house, and promised never to pass it without a call. There is certainly something in an inn, which, by contrast with other scenes, is oftentimes found highly pleasing; it gives an ease and relaxation from those domestic attentions which, though they may not be irksome in general, are sometimes interruptions to occupations more amusing. It may be

presumed Sir Roger felt it at this time, and we agree with him in the following remark—That the man, who cannot find contentment in a decent English inn, is a four unpleasant fellow, and a companion no one would wish to travel with.
Moments, passed thus happily, pass quickly, and our lovers found themselves summoned to their repose, before they were sensible of any wish for it. The next morning they were early stirring, for Sir Roger proposed reaching home by dinner-time, whilst Henry on, horseback took a circuit by Crowbery, under promise of coming to Manstock House in the evening, if he found nothing to prevent him on his visit to his father. As far as to the point where his road branched off, he accompanied Sir Roger and his beloved mistress; whose look at parting told him how unwelcome the moment was that carried him out of sight: from this intimation he very naturally inferred, that the interval of absence was not to be lengthened by his voluntary delay; no sooner, therefore, had he uttered the word 'Farewell!' than, giving the reins to his horse, he put him to a pace that made quick dispatch with the solitary remainder of his way.

He was welcomed by Williams on his return, with the same good news, and had the happiness to find his father advancing fast in his recovery. Williams was still sole manager in office, though Zachary was arrived. The good man was certainly not apt to undervalue his own abilities, but in this case he made no attempt to interpose his advice for any change of system, which probably would not have been accepted by Delapoer, from the first authority in England. As for Doctor Zachary Cawdle, Surgeon, Apothecary, and Man-Midwife, though his name and titles still glittered on the sky-blue scroll, that bestrode the posterns of his gate, yet had he now touched the happy period that closed his medical career, and delivered him bodily over to ease, indolence, and the gout for the rest of his days. The annuity devised by Lady Crowbery, and Jemima's bequest, made up a comfortable independency; and it was for the purpose only of introducing his successor into business with a better grace, that he kept his name in the firme; as to all money arrangements for stock in hand, good will, or any other description of particulars, Delapoer himself had so generously stood forward in

that essential part of the negociation, that nothing was left to the chance and uncertainty of any after-reckoning between the contracting parties.
Having thus disposed of our honest Doctor, we shall probably find little other occasion to call upon him, in the further progress of this history, except with our hearty good wishes for health and long life, to enjoy the tranquillity and repose, which his good fortune has provided for him.
As for Sawney Kinloch, he by his own choice seceded from the shop, and beat his retreat to his beloved town of Aberdeen, with a fortune which, reduced into Scotch pounds, made no contemptible display in his own country;—an example, amongst many others, of the very extraordinary things which close and persevering oeconomy can effect.


CHAPTER IV. When Marriages are making, 'tis a Sign the Drama is drawing nigh to it's Catastrophe.
WILLIAMS now found himself in condition to think seriously of matrimony, without the painful sensation of considering

himself as the pensioner of a wife: Susan on her part had all due partiality for him, and there can be little doubt but he was satisfied with the proofs of it; yet the arrival of Henry was an incident of some importance, and the effects of it had been watched by Williams with all that attention, which wary lovers are apt to bestow upon a new-comer, whom they suspect to be in greater favour than themselves. Susan's deportment, however, had been such, that the result of this scrutiny had not been unfavourable to her, or discouraging to her admirer: the same smile was reserved for Williams when they met in private; and if occasionally a cloud was seen to pass over her brow, or a sigh to escape from her bosom, the voice of love soon restored her to peace; he was therefore firmly bent upon rivetting the nuptial chain, yet a previous word or two with Henry, by way of preface to the awful deed, was anxiously sought by him; and as our hero's visits to his father were daily repeated, that opportunity soon offered itself; when the following dialogue took place.

"I have fully reflected," said Williams, "upon our friend Susan's situation in life, and I think I may say truly and without reserve,

that my feelings are entirely reconciled to put up with the consequences of her involuntary connection with the father of her child. If my mind was not made up upon this point to a perfect acquiescence for all time to come, I wou'd not do her, as well as myself, so base a wrong as to engage with her on any terms; but represented as the transaction has been to me, (and I cannot doubt the truth of it) she appears in heart so innocent, that I confess to you, Sir, I feel no hesitation in resolving to propose to her, and I trust I never shall find cause to blush at the connection."


"There is no ground to suspect you ever will," said Henry: "you was her first love, my friend, and she, I understand, was your's: a thief indeed stole in, and made some pillage of your treasure, but you yourself had first unlocked the chest."


"That's true, that's true," quoth Williams colouring; "I owe the debt of honour, and will pay it: yet give me leave to say, I suspect there will be a sort of blank in her heart for a while to come; but what of that? I must trust to her good sense and my own attentions, to fill it up before long."


"And how can you doubt of either," rejoined

Henry?—"I will not doubt," replied Williams; "nay, I do not doubt, for she has conducted herself hitherto in a manner to my perfect satisfaction, and it wou'd be injustice to suppose she will fail me in future; nevertheless, if I am not asking too great a favour, and intruding on your kindness and condescension further than I ought, I confess it wou'd be a very singular gratification to me, to know the state of her mind in these particulars from your examination and report of it."

To this Henry made answer, that he saw no reason to doubt of Susan's sincerity, neither was he convinced the method he proposed of putting it to the test was altogether adviseable.—"Nevertheless," added he, "if you are resolv'd to put the probe in my hand, and insist upon my using it, as it is your profession to understand the application, so it must be your business to stand to the effects of it."—Williams smiled, and replied he would abide by the consequences.
These words were scarce out of his mouth, when Susan entered the room; and Williams, glancing a significant look at Henry, left them together. A leading kind of conversation

was started by Henry on the subject of her little boy under his charge, which he contrived to train towards the point he had in purpose to discuss.—"I think, Susan," he said, "as business will gather upon your hands with the growth of your child, it might not be amiss to look out in good time for some honest and well-tempered man to be your partner in the task." Susan blushed, but at the same time had a certain arch intelligence in her look, whilst she smiled upon him, that gave him to understand she was aware at whom his introduction pointed.—"I see you are beforehand with me," said Henry, "but if I am touching upon an unwelcome topic, tell me so with sincerity, and I'll say no more; but if I am still as much in your confidence as I us'd to be, and you are not disinclin'd to open your mind to your friend, why shou'd we not discuss this subject together as naturally as any other? and surely none can be more interesting and important."


"Certainly," replied Susan, "none can be so interesting to a person in my circumstances, nor have I any friend on earth, to whose opinion I shall attach so much attention and respect as to your's: yet I know not how, nor

ought I perhaps, if I knew how to describe the sensation it gives me, to find myself address'd by you on this subject. In every matter I can lay my heart before you without scruple or reserve, in this only I feel a backwardness and repugnance, which ought not to be there, nor shall it be, if my utmost efforts can prevent it; therefore I humbly pray you to proceed, and if I misbehave myself by any sudden weakness I am not able to controul, let me rather meet your pity than incur your displeasure or contempt."


"Fear not," replied Henry, "that you can possibly be expos'd to either one or the other, nor suffer yourself to believe I have any motives but those of the purest friendship for pressing this unwelcome explanation upon you. You and I, Susan, have been in certain situations, for which I must remain your everlasting debtor in gratitude, and in the course of which the benevolent warmth and sensibility of your heart have been so far interested in my favour, that I feel myself in such a degree responsible for your happiness and secure establishment in life, as to make it a matter of conscience with me, to see you settled and content, before I can enjoy with perfect peace

of mind the happiness I myself have so flattering a prospect of. You have known my friend Williams longer than I have, and I need not speak to you of his worth; as little need I say that he loves you to the length of marrying you."

Here Susan demanded if Williams had said that voluntarily, and of his own accord, or if Henry had urged him to it, in consequence of any thing that had been talked of in confidence between them. To this Henry replied, "I am free to confess to you, that all I have to tell him he already knows; but as I have had nothing to tell, except what makes for your credit and recommendation, he views your character in its best and fairest light: a soft side perhaps towards the tender passion he may credit you for, but of me he has no right to be jealous, and for himself he has no reason either to glance at what has past, or apprehend for what may be to come. A handsome fellow at all points as he is, can have nothing to fear from an honest-hearted girl like you, whose very first lesson of love was of his teaching."—Susan cast her eyes down, and blushed. Henry proceeded, "He is now establish'd in a profession, where his diligence and

skill will ensure success: what can you better determine upon than to join your means with his, and fix for life with an amiable and worthy man, who has a heart to love you, an understanding to advise you, and a spirit that will protect and uphold you under all events of life?"


"Thank you for your good counsel," replied Susan, keeping her eyes fixt on the floor; "I have a great opinion of Mr. Williams, but—"; here she paused, "if you are so condescending as to be his advocate in this matter, you will advise him not to talk to me on the subject for some two or three days to come."


"I understand you," said Henry; and rightly judging that a longer pleading would not help his client, hastened out of the room.



CHAPTER V. Some of the principal Characters in this History are winding up their Parts.
WHEN our hero had concluded his conference with Susan, he repaired to his father, and had the satisfaction to hear him say he found himself so well recovered, that he proposed, with Williams's permission, to accept Sir Roger Manstock's kind invitation, and pay him a visit the very next day. If our reader has not heard of this invitation, we have his pardon to solicit, as well as that of the hospitable Baronet, for our neglect to record it. At the bottom of the stairs, as he came down from his father's room, he was met by old Weevil, who came to return thanks for his kindness to his son: Tom was now returned home, to the great joy of his family, who contemplated his scars with triumph, and heard his tale with rapture and delight. His father proposed to him to take on with the trade of the mill, and Sir Roger Manstock had offered to put him into a small farm, but Tom was a

lad of an enterprising spirit, and in his short cruize had contracted a passion for the sea. The cut in his skull had not cooled the courage at his heart, and a sea-faring life was so decidedly his choice, that Captain Carey, at the suit of our hero, had promised him employment: And as we are now more at leisure to attend to his particular history than we shall probably be when nearer to the conclusion of our general one, we shall take the opportunity of informing our readers by anticipation, that Thomas Weevil, through Carey's interest, obtained the lucrative employ of purser to his frigate; and in the course of a successful warfare, earned enough to provide a comfortable retreat for himself in time of peace.
Henry's conversation with the Miller was now cut short by a more consequential visitor; his late antagonist, Captain Crowbery, was in the parlour, and requested a few words with him in private. He understood Mr. Delapoer had intended his noble relation the honour of a visit, when he was taken suddenly ill; that his Lordship was now from home, and in his absence he wished Mr. Delapoer to be informed, that if the business was such as he could execute, or was thought worthy to

be entrusted with, he should gladly receive his commands.
Henry made answer, that from what he understood of Mr. Delapoer's mind on the subject, he had no present wish of troubling Lord Crowbery or any of the family upon the business in question; it simply related to a design which he had laid aside: at all events, it did not apply to him, the Captain, and if it should be taken up afresh, he presumed Lord Crowbery would be at home again in a few days. To this the Captain replied, he was sorry to say that was not likely to be the case, as he must confess it was not a very honourable way he had taken of terminating a rash engagement, by running away from it: it could not be denied that Miss Claypole was unfairly treated, for matters had gone great lengths, and now my Lord had taken leave of her in a very abrupt fashion, by going out of England without any warning, either to her or to her uncle, who accompanied him to town upon the pretence of arranging matters for the marriage: that Mr. Claypole was now come back, having had a letter put into his hand after his Lordship's departure, in which he avows his resolution of discharging himself from his engagements

upon prudential reasons; and says he has probably taken leave of England for some years to come.—"I have sought occasion of telling you this," added he, "because I would fain stand clear in your opinion as to my part in the transaction, which is simply that of being left here in a most unpleasant predicament; the nearest relation of a man, whose conduct I cannot approve, but whose interests at the same time I must not abandon. My situation will, I trust, apologize for this; and I protest to you, upon my honour, I have not been his Lordship's adviser in the proceeding. I should have expected that decency alone would have kept him out of an engagement so unseemly and precipitate. Whilst that affair was carrying on, I was banish'd from the castle, to which I am but just recall'd, there to be left in trust of his concerns, with the distressful aggravation of being made witness to a scene, that beggars all description. And now, having trespass'd on your patience with a detail little interesting perhaps to you, I have only to add, that if Mr. Delapoer, as your friend, has any thing to propose within the compass of my power to gratify him in, I shall be happy in the opportunity of shewing my regard to

you, by the attention I shall pay to his commands."


"Captain Crowbery," said our hero, "I am much beholden to you for the kindness of this offer. The candour with which you mark a conduct, that cannot be justified by any principle of honour, leaves me nothing to add to your comments on that proceeding. I am sorry for the lady; but as I suspect no other passion but ambition has part in the disappointment, I hope she will the sooner forget it. With regard to her uncle, I am afraid it is not in my heart to find much pity for his mortification: in the mean time, Sir, I shall impart to Mr. Delapoer the very handsome manner you have express'd yourself in towards him, and I doubt not but he will be duly sensible of your politeness."

This said, Captain Crowbery took his leave, and in a few minutes after, whilst Henry was sitting alone pondering on these events, to his unspeakable surprize, the door was thrown open, and Fanny Claypole herself, without any previous ceremony, hastily and wildly burst into the room.

"I was resolv'd," she cried, "to see you once more for the last time; and if you have

any pity in your heart for an injur'd woman, you will not refuse to hear me. That monster Crowbery, that murderer of his wife, has assassinated my reputation; but I have found out his hiding-place, and I am setting out this moment in pursuit of him: villain as he is, he shall rue my vengeance. After the most seducing promises, the most sacred vows to marry me, he has fled from his engagements out of England; and before I follow him, persuaded it will never be my fate to see you more, I cannot go in peace till I have declar'd to you my contrition, and implor'd your forgiveness: Oh! Henry, there is one moment of my life I must never cease to think upon without horror! Thank Heaven you surviv'd it! I was mad and desperate to destroy you."


"Say no more of it," replied our hero, "banish it from your memory, as I shall bury it in silence; and be assur'd I cordially forgive you."—"I know," said she, "you are capable of every thing that is great and noble, and I implore of Heaven to reward you in the arms of the best and most beautiful of her sex, your beloved Isabella: I only lov'd you; she loves, approves and deserves you."—"I have heard," resumed he, "how basely you have

been treated; but what else cou'd you expect from such a wretch? So far from allowing you ought to regret his flight as a misfortune, it appears to me you shou'd rejoice in it, as an escape out of the hands of a villain, which, to a lady in your situation, is a most providential rescue."


"Ah! Henry," she replied, "it is my situation that makes him a villain, and the worst of villains; but I repeat to you that I will not be injur'd with impunity; and when you hear of me again, you shall hear I am reveng'd. England I shall never visit more; and now, before we part for ever, if you are sincere in your forgiveness of me, you will hear with favour this my last request. My uncle, poor deluded man, is broken-hearted on his own and my account; he repents from his soul his ingratitude to Sir Roger Manstock, and his enmity to you; he justly despairs of regaining your lost opinions; but as he has no where to resort but to his residence at Manstock, he ardently solicits your good offices to secure him such a reception on his return, as may encourage him to resume his functions with some degree of comfort, and not entirely disgrace him in the eyes of his

parishioners. When I am gone, his situation will be sad indeed; my indiscretion, and his own ambition, have destroy'd his peace; your benevolence may preserve him from absolute despair. Have you the magnanimity to extend it to him, and return good for ill?—I am satisfied you have."


"I hope," replied Henry, "we both are capable of returning good for ill. No one, who ever tasted that sweet transport, can regret the sacrifice of such a direful passion as revenge. The virtue of forgiveness is in its own nature so lovely, so congenial to man, that if it had not been prescrib'd to us as a duty, we shou'd have practis'd it as an indulgence. When we are instructed to forgive our enemies, knowing them to be such, it is a precept, that does not take away our sense of injuries, it only abridges us of the privilege of revenging them; and you, who swell with rage against the wretch that has betray'd you, who threaten to pursue him with your vengeance, tell me, is it a pleasurable sensation you now nourish in your heart? Would it not be a happy reformation, were it possible, to change the tempest into a calm with the word of power? Religion has that power, mercy

can speak that word; she can breathe peace into your bosom, and purify the heart in which she dwells, till nothing evil can approach it—mercy is that virtue, which offers opportunity to all; for who is there that has not something to forgive, although he may have nothing to bestow? 'Tis general as the sun; no solitude can exclude its emanation. Cast me upon a desart coast, an exile from society, where animated nature does not draw the breath of life, still I can find some object to engage my care; the plant that feebly vegetates for want of soil, the rill that struggles for a clearer channel, will demand my help; and mercy, like heaven's general dew, shall fall upon the naked earth, though not an insect that has life be present to partake of it."


"I must not hear you on this subject," cried the relentless damsel; "my nerves are brac'd to the undertaking; my wrongs will not be reason'd with, my heart pants for revenge; the intercession of an angel cou'd not shake me from my purpose. Farewell for ever!"—With this terrible denunciation, she sprung out of the room, leaving our hero to pursue his fruitless meditations by himself.



CHAPTER VI. When the Judge is in League with the Advocate, 'tis easy to predict the Issue of the Suit.
THE scene last recorded made so deep an impression on the sensibility of our Henry, that when he returned to Manstock House in the evening, the effect was so discoverable, that he found it necessary to impart to the enquiring Isabella what had caused it. When he had finished his recital, which, though not coloured to the height, was sufficiently horrible to account for what she had remarked, she produced a letter, that day received from the unhappy object of their conversation, wherein she takes shame to herself for her conduct towards Henry, and paints his character in the highest terms of praise: she speaks of Lord Crowbery as a wretch too base to live, and takes a final leave of Isabella, with the warmest wishes for her happiness; recommending, as her last petition, her repentant uncle to pardon and protection, and entreating her to employ her generous efforts

for mitigating the just resentment of Sir Roger. "There is justice, at least," said Isabella, "in this poor creature's heart, tho' it is the slave of passion and revenge. Alas! I fear she is desperate enough to execute any dreadful act she meditates; but what is to be done with this poor deluded uncle of her's, whom she recommends to our pity? Methinks it wou'd be hard to refuse him that, now he has seen his error, and smarts for it so severely. It cannot be expected my father shou'd ever entertain the same affection for him as before, nor is it, perhaps, to be wish'd he shou'd; but I think I may answer for it that he will never shew him any marks of his resentment. I am told he came early to the vicarage this morning, and no doubt it is a heavy moment with him, whilst he is uncertain what reception he will meet from this family, by whose notice or neglect all the parishioners will govern themselves. Poor man! he wants a comforter: I know the tenderness of your heart, Henry, and I wish you cou'd prevail upon yourself to pay him a charitable visit."—"May all your wishes be as readily anticipated!" replied Henry; "I have done that already."—"Have you?" she exclaimed;

"how like yourself is such benevolence! I cannot tell you, Henry, what delight I take in every thing that does you honour; but what is that but saying every action of your life diffuses pleasure to your friends?"—"That praise is more than I deserve," said Henry; "for I really sought my own gratification in visiting Mr. Claypole, who is so much an alter'd man, that I got rid of some unpleasant impressions I had receiv'd in his disfavour; and when a man has the good sense to see and candidly to confess his errors, so far from being lessen'd in my opinion, he seems to me a more amiable character than before he had committed them."—"I dare say I shou'd think as you do," replied Isabella, "if I did not recollect there is one person in the world who has never taken that method to encrease my good opinion of him."—"That only proves your partiality is greater than your memory," rejoined Henry, looking tenderly upon her; "but whilst my whole heart is your's, and every thought which it conceives is inspir'd by the ambition of approving myself to you, following that impulse, how is it possible I shou'd err?"—"Ah, flatterer!" she replied, "if my approbation is your object, that is

long since obtain'd."—In saying this she yielded him her hand, whilst her enraptured lover, pressing it to his lips, dropt on his knee at her feet: "And may I not," he said, "presume, upon that approbation, to solicit the surrender of this lovely hand for life? When will the charming Isabella deign to bless her fond devoted supplicant, whom she has condescended so to praise and honour above all that he can merit? Oh! when will that soft heart, so full of pity, yield to my intercession, and consent to shorten my suspence? How many anxious days have I to number betwixt hope and happiness?"—"Days!" she exclaimed, "what are you thinking of?"—"Of you, the first in all my thoughts, the fairest, loveliest object in creation; of myself next, the wretchedest of beings, if, after a few weeks, I must be doom'd to bear the pangs of separation from all that is dear to me in life."—"And why of separation?" she demanded; "my father, it is true, will be call'd up to town at the meeting of Parliament, but you will be with us, Henry; I am sure my father does not mean to part with you: don't you perceive he is never happy without you?"


"He is very good to me," he replied; "but still I cannot look forward to that time

without alarm. London is my terror: what can I do in it? I have never been in the habits of a London life, nor can I accord to them. Adieu to the soft shades of Manstock, and our delightful walks beneath them! Farewell our peaceful evenings, undisturb'd by noise, uninterrupted by intruders! No more morning rides, amidst flocks and herds and cultivated farms, to visit the improvements of the husbandman and the works of the labourer: no peaceful cottager will be standing at her door to greet my Isabella with a blessing as she passes; no infant children cloath'd by her bounty, no aged objects feeding on her bread; all tranquil pleasures will vanish, and, perhaps, the very senses themselves change with the scene that shifts before them: the eye may lose its purity of speculation, the ear its chaste abhorrence of unmeaning folly or insidious flattery; and the heart, surpriz'd by novelty and sapp'd by dissipation, may in time be perverted from its simplicity; and these venerable towers, the seat of hospitality and peace, when visited again, may present nothing to the imagination but the gloomy haunts of solitude and melancholy."


"Heavens! what a picture," she exclaimed;

"but can these fearful predictions be realiz'd? No, Henry, I have been train'd to domestic habits, and to them I will adhere. My duty leads me to attend upon my father, and to that alone I will devote myself: you shall never have to seek me at public places and assemblies: we will pass our evenings at home, and hold to the old fashions of Manstock House, till it is our happy destiny to return to it again, and then you shall witness if my spirits sink upon the sight of it!"—"Wou'd to Heaven that day was come!" rejoined Henry, with a sigh; "or that my adorable Isabella wou'd be graciously dispos'd to save me from those agonies that parting must inflict."—"Again you talk of parting; where is the necessity for that?"—"Because I am a son," he replied; "and have as yet no nearer, no superior, duty to oppose to nature's call upon me. Can I desert my father in his declining state? His melancholy station, as you know, is fixt, and nothing can allure him from it: how then can I acquit myself to conscience, and be justified to him, unless my lovely advocate will furnish me with a plea to put to silence all opposing claims? Can the most generous of her sex

reflect that she has power to bless me with a word, and will she not pronounce it?"

He accompanied this appeal with a look so touching, and action so tender, that the fond and unopposing Isabella was disarmed and vanquished. The dread of separation on the one hand, and the impulse of all-powerful love on the other, conspired to second and enforce his suit. As she meditated upon a reply, her colour came and went, as alternate emotions succeeded one another: delicacy suggested some repelling thoughts; the recent death of Lady Crowbery opposed a strong impediment to hasty measures; but then she called to mind two months were yet to pass before her father would be called from home, and then the same objections of decorum would not remain in the same force. She perceived that every hour improved her lover's interest with Sir Roger, and in two long months there were many hours to mature that interest, till what was Henry's wish might be her father's also, and then her precipitation would not stand in need of an excuse: in short, these same intervening months were such a resource in her reasonings upon this petition, and love is so ingenious to

avail himself of every resource against hesitation and delay, that she did not feel herself necessitated to quash his hopes by a peremptory refusal; but, on the contrary, turning her eyes upon him with a smile that would have animated any heart which had not totally forborne to beat, and blushing with a consciousness that she was to speak upon a subject that awakened all her sensibility, she said, she hoped he was more ingenious than sincere in stating an alternative to puzzle her poor wits, and make a choice of difficulties, so artfully devised, that she could only say he had found that one circumstance to alarm her with, more terrible on reflection than all she had to dread by yielding to his importunity.—"Oh, Henry!" added she, her sweet voice trembling and sinking into tones the most tender, "it is plain you know the power you have upon my heart, when you menace me with a separation I have not fortitude to bear, and represent yourself in affliction and distress of mind, which you tell me is in my power to relieve you from with a single word, convinc'd, as you must be, there is no sacrifice I wou'd not make to purchase your release. If in this streight, therefore, you are resolv'd

to hem me in by terrors on both sides, I freely own I have not the heart to make you wretched, and do not want the courage to resort to that alternative, which takes the inquietude from you, and fixes it on me alone."

Henry replied to this with such respectful, but impressive tenderness, and though his heart overflowed with gratitude, he tempered it with such delicacy, that before their interesting conversation was concluded, every objection Isabella's timidity had opposed was removed, and her fond heart became so complete a convert to the rhetoric of love, that when they broke up their conference, it would have been hard to decide, could their secret thoughts have been discovered, which of the two was most impatient for the happy moment that was to unite them for life.


CHAPTER VII. Occurrences upon a Visit at Manstock House.
THE next morning Henry rode over to Crowbery, and found his father preparing himself for his visit to Sir Roger Manstock.

stock. It was a bold experiment, but his heart was so much bent upon the undertaking, that Williams no longer opposed it. At the hour appointed Sir Roger's horses came over, and Delapoer stept gaily into his chaise, after taking a most grateful leave of the hospitable women and honest Ezekiel, who were assembled on the occasion, and with many kind wishes attended him to the carriage. The day seemed to smile upon his enterprize, and he arrived at the gates of the venerable mansion with strength and spirits recruited by the freshness of the air and the gentle exercise which the vehicle had given him. On the first step before the door the worthy Baronet received his visitor, and welcomed him with that hospitable grace which was peculiarly his own. As he entered the stately hall, through two files of domestics ranged on each side, he was struck with a peculiar delight, in contemplating a scene that so strongly contrasted every thing his eyes had of late been accustomed to, and carried his imagination back through centuries past to the times of feudal state and chivalry. He seemed never weary of praising and admiring every thing he saw, nor was Sir Roger backward in explaining every object of his curiosity; he

knew the owners of each shield and corselet, had the history of their battles by heart, could point out their portraits in the picture-gallery, and elucidate every banner and bearing of the family coat; to all which Delapoer, who was an adept in heraldry, gave a willing and attentive ear.
In the midst of this discourse, when Sir Roger had brought down his narrative so near to modern times as to be just then engaged in relating an anecdote of his great grandmother, very much to the credit of her beauty, Delapoer's attention was drawn off by the entrance of Isabella, in whose person he beheld a living model of such exquisite perfection, that he could not resist whispering to the Baronet, that whatever might have been the charms of the ancestor, he was persuaded they were outdone by those of the descendant. Sir Roger smiled, and probably was not displeased with the apostrophe, though he still seemed unwilling to give up his great grandmother—murmuring, in an under voice, that he could assure him Lady Rachel was a famous woman in her time. Isabella's manners were of that natural and engaging sort, that all the graces which others gain by study, she seemed to possess to a superior degree

by the gift of nature: how then could she fail to charm a man of Delapoer's sensibility, who at the same time recognized in her fine person a family likeness of that beloved image which sad remembrance had indelibly impressed upon his mind? His figure, though in decay, had still a grace and highborn elegance about it, which neither lapse of years in a debilitating climate, nor the more fatal inroads of corroding melancholy, could so efface, but that there still remained the venerable ruin of a noble form. His address, though certainly not that of the present aera, was not so stiffened by oriental forms as to be troublesomely ceremonious; it had all the gallantry and good-breeding of the old court, with some slight tints, perhaps, of its pedantry and precision: this, in Sir Roger's eye, was the very model of a fine gentleman, and no instruments in unison ever harmonized more perfectly than the good host and his guest.
Sir Roger's stile, as we before observed, was, in point of open hospitality, that of the feudal ages, and his return to Manstock brought a great resort of the neighbouring gentry to his house, where the board might literally be said to groan with plenty; but the most interesting

spectacle to Delapoer was that of the domestics at their dinner, ranged at three distinct tables, according to their gradations and degrees. "This is true magnificence," he cried; "this is a princely manner of administering a great estate." Some venerable personages at the head of the garrison particularly struck him; when a grey-headed senior, who presided at the upper table, giving a signal for silence, rose from his seat, and lifting a can to his lips, proclaimed aloud, "Prosperity to the house of Manstock!" which was repeated by all with the like action, and in the like posture; whereupon, the libation being finished, the whole company broke up, and dispersed to their several occupations and employs.
In the great parlour, where Sir Roger entertained his guests, Delapoer was much amused by the series of family portraits, exhibiting curious specimens of characters and dresses in the several fashions of their times; whilst the Gothic windows of painted glass reflected variegated gleams of the prismatic colours, which played upon the faces of the company with a singular and whimsical effect: Zachary Cawdle in particular, who was one at the table, sate directly in the stream of so broad a glare of crimson

light, that he exhibited a most ferocious and resplendent mask of foil, that would not have discredited the hue of Bacchus himself in the gayest of his frolics.
When the ladies had retired, after dinner, something was said of Lord Crowbery by a gentleman who sate next to Henry. He might have known it was a topic not very acceptable or polite at Sir Roger's table; and as he seemed going into an account of his attachment to Miss Claypole, Henry, in a whisper, reminded him that there were some present who would be thankful to him if he would change the subject he was upon. The young man was proud, ill-mannered, and irritable; he took Henry's hint as an affront, and turning to him with an indignant look, said, in a tone that marked his purpose to be heard by every body round him, "I don't know how I have deserv'd your reprimand, Sir, nor by what right I am stopt in my speech, when I was neither addressing it to you, nor about to speak disrespectfully of Lord Crowbery, to whom I have the honour of being related, and for whom I entertain a very high regard and esteem."

All eyes were instantly upon the angry gentleman; Sir Roger was preparing to interpose,

and Delapoer had drawn himself up into a martial attitude, when our hero with the most perfect composure, not elevating his voice, nor retorting the acrimonious tone in which he had been addressed, replied, that he was not aware of his connection with Lord Crowbery, but since that was the case, he would compromise the matter without any further interruption to the company—"For, if you, Sir," added he, "will be pleas'd to say nothing more as to your opinion of his Lordship, I will be perfectly silent as to mine."—"You will do well, Sir," replied Mr. Hardham (for that was the name of the speaker) "to be silent in this and every other company, where that noble Lord is nam'd."—Then rising from his seat, he said—"With your leave, Sir Roger, we will adjourn to the ladies."—"Hold, Sir," cried Henry, "we are both at issue before this good company, and if either of us has receiv'd an insult, let him that gave it deliver an apology: if there is here one gentleman, that pronounces me in fault, I am instantly prepar'd to make atonement on the spot."—"No, no, no!" was echoed by every voice; and one gentleman added, that he dare say Mr. Hardham

would apologize.—"If that is your opinion," he replied, "you will be pleas'd to tell me, in the first place, for what I am to apologize, and next to whom, for to this moment I never heard what name the gentleman chuses to be address'd by."—"By mine," replied Delapoer, "by a name which he inherits as my son, and by which he is intitled to exact satisfaction from any gentleman that has the hardiness to insult him."

These words were calmly, though pointedly delivered; Mr. Hardham paused for a few moments, then addressing himself to Mr. Delapoer, said—"I am answer'd; and from what I felt as a relation of Lord Crowbery, can allow for what you must feel as so much nearer allied to this gentleman; to you therefore, as his father, I refer myself implicitly, and whatever you in your candour think proper to dictate, that I will repeat."—"Then, Sir," replied Delapoer, "I can be at no loss to pronounce; you have already said enough, and all I have further to wish for my son is, that he may have the honour and happiness of being better known to you."

Thus, by the timely application of a few patient words, an altercation was put a stop

to, which threatened fatal consequences, for Mr. Hardham was a young man of a very forward spirit, and had more than once been engaged in what are called affairs of honour; he had withal a full sense of his own consequence, being a man of great property in the county, son of the lately deceased member, and the very person whom his party meant to have set up as candidate, had not Sir Roger met the wishes of the coalition, and prevented a contest. His petulance nobody wondered at, for that was habitual to him; how he came to be so right-headed in getting out of the quarrel, was matter of welcome surprize to every body; but there was a latent motive, which operated upon him for curbing his temper in the presence of Sir Roger; and it was not so much the firm words of Delapoer, as the fair eyes of Isabella, that were the peacemakers on this occasion: he had watched her during the entertainment; her manners charmed him, her beauty enchanted him; but there was something in her looks at times, that directed his suspicion towards the person of our hero; and this, together with a report, that had reached his ears, of an attachment in that quarter, threw a spark of jealousy upon the

combustibles of his frame, which accounts for the explosion that so suddenly took place: the event, however, shews that this quarrelsome gentleman, like others of the like quality, had temper at command, when it suited him to make use of it.
Few things could have given greater pain to the hospitable heart of Sir Roger Manstock, than to have had the peace and good order of society disturbed beneath the sacred protection of his roof: the harmony that now succeeded, was of course grateful to him above all, and he spared no pains to convince Mr. Hardham of this by repeated marks of the most pointed attention. After a few chearful and conciliatory glasses, it was again proposed to adjourn to the drawing-room: here the pacified gentleman had a fair opportunity of renewing his attentions to the lovely Isabella, without any interruption from Henry, now closeted with his friend Williams, who had galloped over from Crowbery, to impart the glad tidings of his approaching nuptials with his fair betrothed, who had consented to yield (what alone she had withheld) her hand in marriage on the day but one next ensuing. Henry was truly rejoiced at the news, but put

as much gravity into his features as the felicity of the occasion would admit of; all which Williams, who read his thoughts, understood without a comment. Mr. Delapoer was likewise called into conference, not only for the purpose of congratulation, but to undergo certain medical interrogatories, that Williams had to put to him; all which were discussed to the mutual satisfaction of both parties, for nothing was now wanting but gentle exercise and cautious regimen on the patient's part to confirm his recovery, and thereby establish the professional fame of the bridegroom elect.


CHAPTER VIII. A certain Gentleman repeats his Visit.
WHEN Henry returned to the drawing-room, he found nobody there but the father and daughter; the company were all gone, and Mr. Hardham the last. His attention to Isabella had been so marked, that when,

upon taking leave of Sir Roger, he begged permission to wait on him the next morning, upon an affair of consequence, there was little doubt to be made but that it had respect to Isabella. This was conveyed to Sir Roger in a whisper, as he passed through the hall to his carriage; and the Baronet had now been imparting it to his daughter, with his comments upon it to the above effect: her own observations also coincided with the same idea, and the point was not long in debate what should be the nature of the answer to the proposal, if it came; for, independant of all prior engagements, Mr. Hardham had not the happy faculty of recommending himself to the good graces of either party: Sir Roger, indeed, acknowledged that his pretensions were unexceptionable in point of fortune and family, but he thought him of a proud imperious nature; and when he came to reflect upon his behaviour at table towards Henry, he thought he could discover other motives for his acquiescence than what resulted from pure candour and conviction. Isabella said, she had never found herself so embarrassed by the attentions of any man in her life, his whole address seemed artificially put on to cover a character

and temper very different from what he assumed; but of all the persecutions she ever suffered, by being looked out of countenance, none was to be compared with what his eyes had the faculty of inflicting, when she found them for ever fixt upon her; in short, throwing all comparisons out of the question, Mr. Hardham was positively, in her opinion, the most unpleasant man she had ever met with.
In this period of their discourse Henry entered the room; and related what had passed between him and Williams. A new subject was now started, and of a pleasanter nature: Henry spoke in the highest terms of Williams, and as his father was now retired to his chamber for the night, he gave an account of all he had done for Williams, and how he had adjusted matters with Zachary on his behalf, by which he had set him out clear in the world, with a fair prospect of success in his profession, and of a happy connection with the girl of his heart, now comfortably established. Isabella asked if he was fully apprised of Susan's history. Henry assured her, he was acquainted with every particular of it, and had little difficulty in reconciling himself to circumstances, more imputable to ill-treatment

than misconduct.—"And was Susan very readily consenting 
〈…〉
  march? had she no sruples to overc
•…


〈…〉
 wholly and solely attach'd to 
〈…〉
 smiled, and turning to Sir 
•…
 appealed to the court if these were questions he was bound to answer.—"I can understand," replied the worthy magistrate, "that they are questions you wish to evade; however, as Susan was her own mistress, and under no controul, we must suppose she had good reasons for the choice she has made; and I think Isabella herself will allow that is a fair conclusion."

Mr. Hardham was mentioned, and Henry, in a kind of whisper, asked Sir Roger if he did not think it wou'd be right for him to pay that gentleman the compliment of a visit the next morning. Sir Roger answered that he should have thought so, but that Mr. Hardham had signified his intention of coming over to Manstock; and if he conjectured rightly of his business, the ceremony of a visit might very well be dispensed with. Henry took the hint, cast a tender look upon Isabella's blushing countenance, and immediately gave a turn to the conversation, by speaking of Mr. Claypole: he had been with him that morning,

and found him in great affliction, on account of a letter he had received from his niece, by which it appeared she had taken the desperate resolution, of pursuing her base deceiver out of England, and was then on the point of embarking in a pacquet for that purpose. "Is the girl mad," said Sir Roger, "to run after a rascal that any other woman wou'd think herself happy to be rid of? what can she propose to gain by such a crazy expedition?"—"Revenge," cried Henry, "if I am to believe her own professions; and if I may judge from the frantic menaces she vented against him, when she surpriz'd me with a visit at Susan May's, I wou'd not ensure his Lordship's ribs from a stiletto, if once he falls within her reach."—"A wretched catastrophe truly," cried Sir Roger, "that wou'd be, but a striking moral for tyrants: Mr. Hardham will then have to mourn the loss of his respected friend and relation, and this misguided this unhappy man, poor Claypole, will bring his politics to a miserable end; 'tis ever thus with over-cunning men."—"But he has thoroughly repented of his ingratitude," said Isabella, "and is now a real object for your pity and forgiveness."—"He is welcome to

them both," rejoined Sir Roger, "and to every thing that I can subscribe to his consolation and relief; but what I cannot command, my affection and esteem, them I have not in my power to bestow; when once ingratitude has chill'd the heart that glow'd with friendship, who can kindle it afresh? I speak strongly and explicitly to you, my dear children, upon this subject, because I know that both Henry upon this occasion, and you, Isabella, upon others as well as this, have purposely introduc'd it with a kind design of reinstating Claypole in my good opinion, by setting forth his sufferings and contrition: the attempt does honour to your hearts; 'tis amiable in the extreme, and I rejoice that you are capable of being advocates for one, that was no advocate for you, but artfully abus'd my confidence, and turn'd what interest he had in me (and that I own was not a little) insidiously against you both. Baffled in this project, and disappointed of his malice, he betook himself to a wretch, whose very name is poison to my ears, and there began an infamous cabal, which having ended in miscarriage and disgrace, he now repents of; but remember, children, it is repentance after punishment,

and therefore, when I say that I forgive him, I have said enough;—I have nothing more to do with Mr. Claypole."

To this no answer was attempted, and probably from this time till certain circumstances, hereafter recorded, came to light, neither Henry nor Isabella felt in themselves any disposition to revive the subject. Claypole in the mean time kept himself retired from all society, except when Henry occasionally paid him a charitable visit, or Sir Roger cheared him with a civil word, which every Sunday he took care to address to him after divine service, in the sight of the congregation.
The next morning came, and Sir Roger was observed to be more than ordinarily thoughtful during breakfast: his mind was occupied with the expectation of his unwelcome visitor. When he reflected upon what had fallen from him at table, where he was interrupted by Henry, he called to mind so many unpleasant marks of a purposed affront, so much arrogance in his manner, and such indications of a suppressed resentment, even in the very act of atoning for his insult, that he was not without suspicion that the flame of his temper would find some other vent, if

upon the presumption of his proposing for Miss Manstock, he was to meet him with an instant and abrupt refusal. On this account he was not a little perplexed how to deport himself in the conference, so as neither to irritate him against Henry as a rival, nor encourage him to consider Isabella as a lady he was warranted to pursue with his addresses; and the whole result of Sir Roger's meditations amounted only to this, that he had a clearer sight of his difficulty than of the way to lead him out of it. It was therefore not a little to be regretted, that before he had gained any distinct perception of the line he was to follow, Mr. Hardham was announced, and of course immediately admitted to a private conference.
Mr. Hardham prefaced his more material business, by apologizing for words that had escaped from him yesterday, in the heat of conversation, which, as far as they alluded to Lord Crowbery, he feared might have conveyed an impression in his disfavour, as seeming to imply that he approved of his Lordship's conduct in general, when in fact he only alluded to that part of his character, which was uppermost in his thoughts, the steady support

which he had always given to the county interests of his family: that he was not then apprised of the just reasons Sir Roger had to resent his treatment of an amiable lady, unfortunately lost to the world; neither was he informed of the late disgraceful step he had taken, of flying from engagements, which though rashly made could not be honourably abandoned;—these circumstances, he confessed, had been candidly explained to him that very morning by Captain Crowbery; and it was but fair to say, that upon that statement he felt himself obliged to give up his noble relation as indefensible on both accounts; and this he hoped would suffice to set him strait in Sir Roger's good opinion, if he had unfortunately endangered it from any thing he had inadvertently been led to say the day before.—Here he came to a stop, and seemed to expect some answer from Sir Roger.
Sir Roger replied, that it was a point with him to enter into no discussion of Lord Crowbery's conduct, especially with Lord Crowbery's relations: his niece was dead, and whatever were her sufferings in this life, they were now at an end: as to Miss Claypole's case, he had nothing to do with it; it was a story he

did not wish to lend his ear to; in like manner he begged leave to say, that with respect to any opinions Mr. Hardham might adopt, in favour or disfavour of the Lord in question, he hoped he understood himself too well to interfere in any shape with them, much less was he disposed to revive the mention of a trifling altercation, which was so completely done away to the honour of both parties, and for that reason should be buried in perpetual oblivion.

"Then if I may indulge the hope," he rejoined, "that my condescension in accommodating myself to the gentleman's vivacity was acceptable to Sir Roger Manstock, let me presume to draw one obvious conclusion from it, and take for granted that he understood the sacrifice to have been, what it truly was, a mark of my respect to him, and an ambition so to recommend myself to his opinion, as to ground some title to his favour and protection in a suit which I have now to make, and on the issue of which the happiness of my whole life depends."

Mr. Hardham paused for a reply, but none being made, he proceeded to explain:—"I flatter myself I need not dwell upon particulars

so much within your knowledge, as my family or fortune; they are such, I trust, as will entitle me to credit, when I assert that neither interest nor ambition have any share in the sincere and pure attachment which I profess to have for your most amiable daughter: no, Sir, it is by the heart alone I am attracted to Miss Manstock; and as I hope my character may boldly face the light, and never need the veil of mystery, I hold it fair and honourable to apprise you of my wishes, and request your sanction to the tender of my most humble addresses to your lovely daughter."

Sir Roger paused a while; and then with much gravity, and in a deliberate tone, said, "Your pretensions, Mr. Hardham, in point of fortune and family, are, as you say, too well known to stand in need of any explanation; they are such as qualify you to propose for any lady in this kingdom; and certainly, Sir, in the attachment you profess for my daughter I have every reason to believe you guided by no other motives than those of free choice, and disinterested inclination. When, therefore, you appeal to me, that I wou'd sanction the tender of your addresses to Miss Manstock, (I believe I use your own expression) I can have

but one answer to make, so long as your reference is confined to but one point, and that simply to demand a passport to my daughter: no father, I believe, whatever may be his views for his child, will refuse that to Mr. Hardham."

To this he replied, "If I have explain'd no further to you on this interesting subject, Sir, I hope you will consider it as a very natural wish on my part to owe my success, if I am so blest as to obtain it, wholly and solely to my own interest in the lady's good opinion, who is to constitute my happiness; and as I cannot doubt but Miss Manstock is incapable of condescending to bestow her regards on any man of dubious character, or just emerg'd from meanness and obscurity, I trust, if I am permitted to approach her, I shall at least not have to combat with a heart pre-occupied by any rival, or, if by any, not by one that will disgrace her preference, and make me feel myself degraded by the competition."


"As you put no question to me in the matter," replied the Baronet briefly and coldly, "I am not put to any answer.—You have free access to Miss Manstock."


This brought the proud suitor to a pause: he perceived he had gone too far, and carried his language too high; and he saw himself in the necessity of qualifying what he had said with an apology, or throwing up the negotiation at once: "I am afraid," said he, "that I have express'd myself too warmly and unwarily; but I entreat Sir Roger Manstock will be assur'd, that I entertain a most profound respect for his person and character, and if I spar'd to solicit his good favour and protection to my suit, it was solely dictated by an ambition, which I hope will be thought both natural and commendable."

Here he turned his eyes upon Sir Roger;—a silent bow was all the answer he obtained.

"I perceive," added he, "I am unfortunate in my manner, and deficient perhaps in something, which in the character of a petitioner I ought to carry about with me; but I am new in the predicament, and having failed to conciliate the father's favour, I will not chuse so unlucky a moment for requesting an audience of the daughter. I am not quite prepar'd to receive two rebuffs in the same breach."—With these words he quitted his seat, and Sir Roger rising at the same moment,

they took a silent leave, and Mr. Hardham mounted his curricle in waiting, highly out of humour with his reception, his proud heart swelling with vexation to find his self-importance humbled; and prepared to vent his spite upon two unoffending horses, whose tender skins soon smarted under the ceaseless lash of their unfeeling tyrant.
Oh! what a wretch is man, when pride and self-importance seize upon his heart! the scorn of every noble mind, the pest of all society, a monster amongst men! Begone from me, thou self-swolen blockhead, who art at once too foolish for my resentment, and too mischievous for my pity. In some bye turn and crossing of my walk in life when I chance upon thee, (for nothing else but chance can throw me in thy way) no sooner do I recognize thy staring owl-eyed visage, than I post down a promise in my tablets, to sketch thy gloomy portrait from the life, and hang thee up to public mockery as satire's lawful prize. But when I stretch the canvas, and begin to daub it with thy ugliness, I soon perceive thou dost not own a single feature, that can furnish any thing but loathing and disgust; too dull to help my fancy to a jest, too despicable to

inspire it with a serious thought, and too hardened to be mended by correction—I cast thee from my thoughts, discovering thee to be so mere a caput mortuum, that no chemistry can extract so much virtue out of thee, as would even serve to give physic to a dog.


CHAPTER IX. Why is Earth and Ashes proud?
MR. Hardham, instead of returning to his own house, drove to Crowbery Castle, to make report to his friend the Captain, and consult him upon the posture of affairs at Manstock. The advice he got here was on the whole very prudent, but he was not just then in the best temper to receive it. Captain Crowbery, as we have before observed, entertained a very high opinion of Henry, and ever since his rencontre with him had taken all occasions of doing justice to his behaviour, not only in that affair, but in every other that had come to his knowledge, particularly as to the share he had in Carey's action with the frigate. When Hardham therefore spoke

contemptuously of him as a rival, and seemed to reproach himself for having stooped to any apology, Crowbery plainly told him that he could by no means be a party in any steps for grafting a serious quarrel on a silly altercation, that had been once fairly dismissed: for his own part, he had been already flagrantly in the wrong towards Henry, and had turned out with him in consequence of it; it must then be a very strong case indeed that would call him out again, either as principal or second.—"And was it not a strong case," Hardham demanded, "when the character of Lord Crowbery was glanc'd at in such pointed terms, and in a public company, by a fellow who had no right to use his name, in any place or on any occasion, but with deference and respect?"


"I thought," replied Crowbery, "that I had open'd enough to you in our morning's conversation on this subject to justify the words that Henry us'd, had they been even stronger than you state them. I can now truly say, that if you and I, as relations of that unhappy man, have any ground left us to stand upon in his defence, we owe it to the candour of the very person you complain of. The melancholy news I receiv'd this day, led me to turn some

papers over, which, at Blachford's death, were honourably deliver'd up by Henry, that in some hands wou'd have been arms no mortal cou'd have parried. If he open'd them, we are at the mercy of his honour for keeping them secret; if he return'd them unexamin'd, we are indebted to his delicacy for our possession of them. You may believe me, Mr. Hardham, that those papers, which I have now destroy'd, wou'd have brought to light very dark dealings, and made the title, that has now by a most dreadful accident devolv'd on me, a title of disgrace and shame."

Hardham eagerly demanded what accident he alluded to?—"The death of Lord Crowbery," he replied. His Lordship had landed at Ostend, and, from the position of the armies, had been stopt there for some days; in the mean time, a villain found means to assassinate him in the streets, as he was coming home late at night to his hotel: he was taken up by the patrole, mortally stabbed, and incapable of giving any account of what had passed. Every means had been taken by the commandant for discovering the murderer, but hitherto without success, he had strong suspicions in his mind, which pointed to a certain person, who had

closely followed him out of England, but these he would not make public, being determined to set out the next morning, and pursue his enquiries on the spot.—"I am shock'd," replied Hardham, "at the account; and whilst I congratulate your Lordship on your accession to the title of your family, I must deplore the catastrophe, that has devolv'd it upon you under circumstances of so melancholy a cast. If I can be of any service to you here in your absence, or even by accompanying you in your journey, I am at your command."—"Your offer," said the new Lord Crowbery, "is most kind and friendly, and in part I will accept it, as you may be of most essential use and service to me here, if you will consent to put my mind at peace with respect to a family, for whom I entertain the highest reverence and esteem; I mean the house of Manstock. There is nothing lies so heavy on my heart as the treatment they have met with from the unfortunate deceas'd; I am the last man living that shou'd speak too harshly of Lord Crowbery, my benefactor, but I have been made a painful witness to such things, as make me shudder to reflect upon. I hold it therefore my first duty to make all the atonement in my power

to that much-injur'd family; and in doing this I think I shall approve myself a real friend to the memory of the deceas'd. And now, my dear Sir, suffer me to appeal to you, and put it to your heart, if in honour you have any just cause of animosity against that excellent young man, who, if I'm well inform'd, is firmly engaged to the lady you propos'd for. Is he in the fault of that, or are you warranted to affront and decry him because he is approv'd of by Miss Manstock, whom you hardly knew by sight, and never thought of before yesterday?"—"I don't know from authority that he is engag'd to Miss Manstock: Sir Roger did not tell me that."—"You did not ask him, I believe," replied Lord Crowbery; "but the fact is easily ascertain'd, if you chuse to take the direct course of applying either to Sir Roger or to the lady herself."—"I confess to you," said Hardham, "it wou'd not be very pleasing to me to be so inform'd by either of them, tho' I shou'd not be sorry to come at the truth by any other channel. I am not ambitious to be mark'd as a rejected suitor to any lady, who prefers Mr. Henry Delapoer."

Here a servant came in, and announced the gentleman last mentioned—"Shew him into

the saloon," said my Lord, "and say I will wait upon him immediately. You have now an opportunity," said he, applying himself to Mr. Hardham, "of granting me the favour I have requested, if you will condescend to remain here a few minutes, whilst I step out to him, and will allow me to bring him when I return, to take you by the hand, which I persuade myself he'll gladly do: you are both men of honour, and only need to be known to each other to be the best of friends."—"I know you to be such," replied Hardham, "therefore do by me as you think right, and I will wait your pleasure." Lord Crowbery hastened to his visitor—"Am I before-hand with my information," said Henry, "or is it known to you that I am now to address you as Lord Crowbery?" He was informed of the event.—"I shou'd have to apologize for this visit," resumed our hero, "if it was not purely on a case of conscience; but I cannot keep a circumstance conceal'd, that may in any way affect the investigation of a crime so horrible as murder."—Here he recited the conversation of Fanny Claypole, when she forc'd herself upon him; and concluded with expressing his regret that he had suffered such menaces

to pass without taking instant measures for preventing their effect—"If you have any thing to regret on that account," said my Lord, "how much more cause have I to reproach myself, who was so immediately in the way of her fury, and a witness to the whole torrent of it! but I considered it as the impotent raving of a disappointed woman, and let it pass."—He then explained the measures he intended to pursue, for tracing it, if possible, to a discovery, by resorting to the spot—"But before I depart from this place," added he, "upon that mournful business, there is a matter of a most pressing nature on my mind, which I earnestly request you will so far take charge of as to pledge me to Sir Roger Manstock in the most respectful terms, for every satisfaction in my power to make, not only with regard to the liquidation of the funeral expences by him defrayed, but also of my entire acquiescence in the will of the Lady Crowbery, which I suspect there was a meditation of contesting, and at the same time I shall give orders that every article personally appertaining to that lady in this house, which I am sorry to say were permitted to be put out of their places, shall be brought together and collected for his

revision and Miss Manstock's, whom I shall request to make choice of any such things which they may put a value upon, as remembrancers of one so worthily lamented and belov'd; and this I desire you will tell them I tender as the only atonement in my power to make, on the part of an unhappy man, who, if life had been spar'd to him, wou'd, I flatter myself, have seen his error, and done what I now do in his name, and in honour to his memory."


"My Lord," cried Henry, rising from his chair, and taking his hand, "I thank you; you have justified the high opinion I conceiv'd of you, and have greatly honour'd me by this commission."—Here he stopt, for his voice faultered; and glancing his eyes upon a picture of his mother, over the chimney, which gave a striking character of her in youth and beauty, nature forced her way, and putting his handkerchief to his eyes, he yielded to the irresistible emotion, and said no more.

"We will adjourn to the library," said Lord Crowbery; "where a friend of mine is waiting, who wishes to pay his compliments to you. Suffer me only to ask you, before you go, if you think that picture will be an acceptable

present to Miss Manstock; and I name her in preference, because I consider it in effect the same as giving it to you. I persuade myself," added he, "I am not premature in supposing her interests and yours are one and the same."—To this Henry made a modest and grateful reply, neither affirming nor denying the assumption above stated; but said he would report to Miss Manstock his most obliging offer. Lord Crowbery then informed him who the person was that expected him in the library; and, after a few words introductory to their meeting, took him by the hand, and ushered him to Mr. Hardham, addressing himself to each in turn with many civil speeches and professions of esteem, hoping it might be his good fortune, as common friend to both, to bring forward such an explanation as might have no grounds for future misunderstanding on the part of either. Mr. Hardham said, he trusted the gentleman could not doubt his readiness to do away affronts, whether justly or unjustly taken up; and he presumed it was no small proof of his continuing in the same disposition, that he had waited his leisure for the sole purpose of paying him his compliments in Lord Crowbery's presence. Henry,

on his part, assured him, that he had devoted that morning to the honour of paying him a visit at his own house, but had been told he would be from home. He hoped Mr. Hardham had carried with him no impressions from their last meeting that made a second explanation necessary, respecting any thing which had there occurred; if it was so, he was perfectly ready on his part to renew the assurances he had then given him of his entire acquiescence in the manner he had taken for terminating that trivial dispute.
Here the Lord Crowbery interposed; he hoped there was no intention on either side of looking back to what was past, but, on the contrary, by looking forward, to prevent occasion of disputes in future: "And this," he added, "may be easily effected where two men of honour meet, mutually dispos'd to deal candidly with each other, shou'd they find themselves competitors in the same pursuit."—"I do not quite pledge myself to that," said Mr. Hardham; "as I wou'd not choose to engage in any pursuit where I did not see myself either fairly pitted against any that might oppose me, or well assured of surmounting competition. Much as I respect Miss Manstock, I have no

ambition to be pointed at as her discarded suitor; and great as my opinion may be of Mr. Delapoer's extraordinary merits, I must own I do not covet the honour of being known as his rival in a struggle for that lady's favour, if he has already secur'd her affections, and been approv'd of by Sir Roger as his son-in-law."


"And does Mr. Hardham expect," said Henry, "that I shou'd account to him for my proceedings, having no desire to make enquiries into his? Wou'd it become me to speak out of Sir Roger Manstock's family of what I know or believe to be passing in it? That I will never do; these lips shall never presumptuously profane the name of Miss Manstock, nor will I suffer any others so to do in my hearing with impunity."


"Then I must take the liberty to tell you—" said Hardham; and was proceeding, when Lord Crowbery, putting his hand upon his breast, said, "Stop, I conjure you, Sir, if it be only for my sake, and let us argue calmly, or dismiss the subject. I was the promoter of this interview, and am pledg'd for the issue of it. Cou'd I have suppos'd that you, my friend and relation, wou'd have express'd yourself in

a stile so lofty and so irritating, I wou'd as soon have burnt this house over my head as suffer'd it to have been made a scene of quarrel and contention. What Mr. Delapoer has said is not one word too much for the occasion that gave rise to it. How else cou'd you expect a man of honour to reply to such a speech, in which you seem'd to make your own self-consequence your whole concern? Methinks, of all men living, Mr. Hardham, you shou'd keep a guard upon yourself, and, being so quick to feel in your own person, shou'd be cautious how you wound the feelings of others. I speak plainly, Sir, but I have the rights of hospitality to protect; and if you are offended with me for it, I must meet the consequences."

All this while Hardham sate with a contemptuous smile upon his countenance, affecting to receive every reproach as a compliment, bowing with an air of counterfeited respect; when perceiving that Lord Crowbery had concluded, he replied, "I am infinitely oblig'd to you, my Lord, for your extraordinary politeness, and shall endeavour to convince you that I have not lost one word of your edifying lecture, by the early opportunity I shall take of requesting you to hear the comments

I have made upon it."—Lord Crowbery with quickness replied, "Use your own pleasure, Sir; I shall be at home for the day: when you are ready with your comments, I shall expect you; and for security's sake you may bring a prompter with you."



CHAPTER X. Pride meets its Punishment, and Love its Reward.

"LET him go," said Lord Crowbery, as Hardham bounced out of the room; "he has the pride of Lucifer."—Henry expressed great uneasiness at what had passed, and strongly contended that the affair was his own. This Lord Crowbery would not admit, nor did he look to be farther troubled with his angry cousin; he had had many such sparrings with him, which had passed off as he supposed this would, for he never spared him when he was in that vaunting stile; however, if he should chance to be just then in one of his fighting fits (for his courage came

by starts, though his petulance was constitutional) it would not, he owned, be amiss to be ready for him.
Henry hoped he would have no farther trouble with him, felt great responsibility for the consequences, and would hold himself at his call, either in his Lordship's house or at Williams the surgeon's, so long as there was any chance of his services being wanted.—"I will intrude upon you no longer than for two hours of your time," he replied; "within which, if our angry gentleman does not make his appearance, I shall think no more of him; if in that interval you can amuse yourself in this library, or prefer going to Mr. Williams, I will overhawl my artillery in the interim, and put my hand to a few papers not quite so convenient to be left at the issue of chance and accident."

This said, they parted, Henry taking his course to his friend Susan's, where he found Williams and his betrothed, this being the eve of their wedding-day: here he took the first opportunity of telling Williams, in a whisper, the probability there was of an affair taking place, where his attendance would be most acceptable, which he readily engaged for; he then, with as much gaiety as he could assume,

made his congratulations to Susan; and whilst this discourse was going on, as he stood by the window, Sir Roger Manstock's chaise was discovered coming across the green, and making directly for the house. It was quickly at the door, when he heard himself joyfully greeted by his beloved Isabella, who was seated at the side of her father. They quitted the carriage, and after a most respectful welcome on the part of Susan, Williams having modestly retired, they were at their own request left in private with our hero.
Sir Roger opened the business, by informing him of Mr. Hardham's proposal, and the anxiety thereby occasioned not only to Isabella, but himself, from the known impetuosity of that haughty suitor's temper, and the dread he had of consequences thence resulting: he would not disguise from Henry that his sudden disappearance that morning, so quickly following Hardham's unsuccessful visit, had so alarmed his daughter, that at her desire he had come over thither with her, in hopes of finding him, as fortunately they had done.—"I let you into this secret," said he, smiling, "though Isabella is here present, and hears herself betrayed by me, because, to say the

truth, there is now an end to all reserve between us, and my only wish is to put a final stop to all solicitations, by joining your hands without delay, and rendering my soul's darling into your entire protection: and I pray God to bless you, my dear children, in each other, and me in both!"

Henry, who was seated between them, took the hand of each, and pressed it to his heart in speechless ecstacy. Isabella, suffused with blushes of the deepest dye, and not venturing to raise her modest eyes, which sensibility had filled with tears, kept still silence, which was not interrupted till Sir Roger, resuming his discourse, and addressing himself to Henry, said, "Now if you are question'd by that haughty interloper, tell him you have my authority to say that Isabella Manstock is—(what shall I bid you say?) tell him at once, and stop his importunity—she is your wife.—Now ask her if I've said a syllable too much."

The reference was obeyed upon the instant;—the enraptured lover was at the feet of his mistress, the unopposing mistress was enfolded in the arms of her lover.
After a proper portion of time had been devoted to joy and gratitude on the part of

our hero, Sir Roger began to comment on the circumstances of Lord Crowbery's assassination. The deed was horrid, the suspicions it involved afflicting, but the removal of such a worthless being out of life was providential; he had seen that unhappy man, the uncle of a desperate creature, stained, as he greatly feared, with the blood of the deceased; he comforted him as well as he could, yet he perceived his mind was immersed in deep despair and melancholy.—"Whether he is inform'd," said Sir Roger, "of any circumstances that fix the guilt upon his niece, I forbore to enquire, but I shou'd fear he knows more than he thinks proper to reveal."—Henry perceived that Claypole had been less communicative to Sir Roger than to him, for he had actually exhibited to him in confidence a letter under his niece's hand, exulting in the completion of her revenge, and boasting that she had found a hand to punish perfidy; a Frenchman who had been lurking about London for evil purposes, and had been warned out of England, took his passage in the same pacquet with her to Ostend; she sounded him, and found him the fittest agent for her desperate purpose, being deep in all the massacres that had deluged Paris

with human blood: he had made good his escape, and was safe amongst his brother sansculottes; for her part she defied pursuit; she had lodged herself where no search could follow her;—let her uncle therefore set his mind at rest, she should never be heard of more, and bade him everlastingly farewell.
Time had imperceptibly slipt away during this conversation, and Sir Roger had just recollected to order his chaise, when Williams came into the room, and whispered Henry that Lord Crowbery expected him at the castle; in spite of all his self-command, he changed colour at the summons, and Isabella instantly caught alarm. Honour demanded instant obedience to the call, yet Henry's ingenuity could hardly suggest an excuse sufficient to bear him out; the best apology he could devise upon the sudden was, that Lord Crowbery being on the point of setting out for Ostend, and understanding he had had an interview with Fanny Claypole just before her leaving Crowbery, had requested him to come to him without delay.—"Tell me only," said Isabella, "that you are not going to meet that hateful Hardham, and I shall be at peace."—"I have nothing to say to Mr. Hardham," replied

Henry; "and I conjure you not to think about him."—So saying, he hurried out of the room, and bidding Williams follow him as fast as he could, made the best of his way to the place of assignation.
Isabella's apprehensions were by no means quieted, for his agitated looks and impatient motions augured something on his mind more important and more pressing than the cause he had assigned. She ran to Susan May, and asked for Williams.—He was gone with Henry.—This was a circumstance to aggravate her terrors: duels and wounds immediately occurred; why else should he take a surgeon with him? Even Sir Roger's equanimity was not proof against this. At one time he would go to the castle himself;—this Isabella would not hear of—he would send a servant to spy what was going forward—he would contrive a message to Lord Crowbery himself;—he could neither reconcile his mind to the one, nor invent the other. The chaise was at the door, but Isabella could not stir from the spot, her fears had rooted her; and Dame May, who foresaw there would be a demand upon her closet, was busied in providing resources against faintings and hysterics: Susan strove to

administer the consolation of reason; but no sooner did the apprehension of Henry's danger seize her fancy, than she ceased to reason against imaginary fears, and, by subscribing her own to Isabella's, aggravated both.
In the midst of this confusion, Zachary Cawdle came into the house. A new-comer in such situations, let him come from whence he will, gives a spring to curiosity, and awakens hope.—"Did he know if Mr. Hardham was at the castle?"—"He saw him pass his door towards Lord Crowbery's not many minutes ago."—It was the sentence of temporary death to Isabella: she fell back in her chair pale as ashes.—"Hell and confusion!" exclaimed Zachary, "what devil has bewitch'd my tongue, that it shou'd stumble on this mischief?"—He then bestirred himself to retrieve the damage he had done, and Dame May was dispatched for the requisites, whilst the father stood motionless and aghast. Zachary had his fingers on her pulse:—"Courage! worthy Sir," he cried; "the defection is passing off; the pulsation of the artery is perceptible; we begin to revive."—"God be prais'd!" exclaim'd the father, in a transport—When, in the same instant, a voice was heard

from without, calling aloud upon Doctor Cawdle, and in a few moments after, Susan, who had run out upon enquiry, came back with the joyful tidings that Henry was perfectly safe: Zachary's assistance was wanted for Mr. Hardham, who was shot by Lord Crowbery in a duel.—"Jump into my chaise," said Sir Roger, "and bid them drive to the wounded man's relief as fast as they can gallop."—"Fair and softly, worthy Sir," quoth Zachary; "I can neither jump nor gallop to his rescue: Williams is on the spot, and is well us'd to gun-shot wounds; he only wants me as surgeon's mate."—Zachary now with due deliberation seated himself in the chaise, and the messenger, having mounted behind it, gave directions where to drive. Hardham was found on the ground, and Williams had just then succeeded in staunching the haemorrhage; the ball had entered a little above the knee, and had lodged itself by a slanting course up his thigh, as he stood in a crouching posture when he gave his own fire, and received that of his opponent almost at the same moment. He fell, and fainted on the ground; when he came to himself he was earnest with Williams to be taken to his own house, but

in this he was not indulged: when Zachary arrived they found means to convey him into Lord Crowbery's house; and Henry now, at the earnest wish of his principal, took Zachary's seat in the chaise, and hastened back to the party at Susan May's. Great was their joy at his return, and every countenance (but chiefly that on which his eyes were first fondly fixed) was brightened at his presence. To them he related the particulars of the rencontre, in the event of which the overweening pride and insolence of Hardham, who was obstinate against all accommodation, was proportionably chastised.


CHAPTER XI. The Drama closes, and the Curtain falls.
HENRY accompanied the chaise to Manstock House, and to gratify Isabella no less than himself, was hardly ever out of sight by the way. Hardham, in the mean time, was deposited with all possible care in the house of his antagonist: during six days Williams, who remained in the closest attention, found

no moment when the operation of extracting the ball could be undertaken with safety to his life, which remained in so precarious a state, that Lord Crowbery felt himself obliged to postpone his intended expedition; and sent his lawyer, properly instructed, to pursue all necessary measures at Ostend on his behalf.
On the seventh morning Williams successfully extracted the ball, and symptoms became so favourable as to flatter him with a cure. Some time after this, Hardham was carried to his own house, and Lord Crowbery's mind was relieved from its weight of anxious suspence: his journey, however, was now entirely laid aside from the report of his agent, whose attempts to trace the murderer had been entirely fruitless: the body of the deceased was brought over, and committed to the vault of his ancestors.
Williams was in such favour with his patient, that no other surgeon was permitted to approach him. One important business there was, in which the fair Susan had a share, that suffered a postponement by his attendance upon Hardham; the matrimonial knot was not yet tied: this indeed, in the present case, was simply the delay of a ceremony; and the

very first leisure morning Williams could with a safe conscience avail himself of, that ceremony was effectually performed; and Susan took possession of that honourable title, which her fidelity and good conduct ever after maintained, through a series of many prosperous and happy years.
In Manstock House, Love took his station undisturbed by any cares or interruptions, save only those chaste tremors, which the gentle breast of Isabella felt, whilst Time, for ever on the wing, was weaving the soft silken fetters, now almost complete and ready for the hand of Hymen, that artist who too often makes but blind and bungling work, coupling ill-sorted pairs with coarse and clumsy tools. Not such our hero and his fair betrothed—lovely in person, lovelier in their virtues, their soft and tender hearts melted into each other with a coalescence so entire, that soul with soul never more sweetly harmonized: yet sometimes, when the ardour of his looks alarmed her, she would chide him with her blushes; sometimes she would turn away and hide her face, or bid him go from her and join the company; this had he done, he would have misunderstood the spirit of the order

totally, instead of which he had a way of making peace, that nature pointed out, which gained him pardon by repeating the offence.

"You are incurable," she would tell him at these times, "and I give you up; another time I'll lock my door, and keep you out."—The minutes still rolled on, and yet the door was not locked; the offence was still committed, and the menace, though repeated, was never executed.—"What are you musing upon?" she said one day, as he sate rapt in thought.—"I am reducing days to hours," he replied, "and hours to minutes, that I may calculate each fraction of the interval 'twixt this and Monday."—"Add to it another year," she cried, "and you'll be nearer to the sum. Don't talk of Monday, I'll not hear about it."—At that moment the porter's bell announced an arrival. Isabella ran to the window, and descried Doctor Sandford coming up to the door.—"There, there!" she cried, "you are all together in a plot against me: I'll not go down to Doctor Sandford; much as I esteem him, I'll not quit my chamber this whole day; I know for what he comes."—"He comes to bless your Henry, by entitling him to call the loveliest object in creation his;

he comes to ratify the vows that I have made, to honour, love, and serve you with my life; and what is there so terrible in this, that shou'd disturb my Isabella's gentle spirits? What does the ruler of my passions discern in her devoted Henry, that she shou'd shrink from with affright? Command me, task me as you will, and I'll obey, so you do not forbid me to adore you and to doat upon you as I do this moment, have done ever, and to life's latest period ever must.—Say, Isabella, are these arms, thus pressing, thus encircling you, bonds that you wish to break, chains that you fain wou'd fever and cast from you? Question my heart, 'tis your's; ask if there's mercy in it for my Isabella; mark if it does not throb with tender pity and compassion for your virgin fears; and witness if the drops that fall from it are half so dear as these which your soft eyes distil. Oh! my soul's treasure, are you not at rest upon this faithful bosom? Do you not feel a conscious satisfaction, thus to know yourself belov'd, protected, cherish'd by a friend, who lives but on your smiles, nor has a sense of earthly happiness, but what the contemplation of your charms bestows upon him?"



"Oh! Henry," she replied, and sunk upon his breast, "I render you my heart, and all that it contains; even my terrors are fled from me, and nothing now remains but all-subduing love: your words, your looks, bespeak such mild consideration for your poor trembling Isabella; and I well know there is such mercy in your manly nature, that I am yours this day, this hour, this instant, and for ever."—Silence ensued, what else their thoughts supplied, love found expressions for, more eloquent than words: the minutes were not few; but, rated to their value, they had outweighed years of common price.
Isabella now was not averse to welcome her late dreaded visitor, the worthy Doctor Sandford—severed from the arms of her enraptured Henry, with love in every glance, and grace in every motion, she came forth in beauty's richest bloom, a form to charm all eyes, and captivate all hearts.
Every body was occupied in preparations for the approaching journey: great as was the sacrifice Sir Roger made to the peace of the county, when he took upon himself the painful duty of attending parliament, there were some circumstances that qualified the disagreeable

necessity at the present moment, as he had affairs of great consequence on his hands with respect to Isabella's marriage, which could only be adjusted in London. Mr. Delapoer, the father of our hero, had also business not less important, and agreed to accompany him; and a house large enough to receive the whole party, and perfectly commodious, had fortunately been secured for Sir Roger, and was already well aired, and occupied by part of his household, sent before him for that purpose. His plan was to have the wedding on the morning of his departure, and as private as possible. The Rev. Mr. Claypole, in a bad state of health, was gone to Bath, and Dr. Sandford had been invited from Hagley to perform the ceremony. The bride and bride-groom were to take their departure together, and reach town that evening; Sir Roger, Delapoer, and Sandford were to follow in the family coach by easy stages, and sleep by the way.
On the morning before these events were to take place, Henry rode over to Crowbery, and took a friendly leave of the Lord of the Castle; he had also a parting conversation with Mr. and Mrs. Williams and the good Dame; to Ezekiel he devoted a full hour, which the

good man filled up, after his manner, with admonitory lessons for his conduct in the metropolis, that sink, as he pronounced it, of infamy and corruption. Ejaculations, prayers and blessings in abundance he cordially super-added; and at last let him depart with this exhortation—That if affluence and prosperity should await him, he would never forget that he had felt the sorrows of poverty and distress; but, on the contrary, if disappointments and misfortunes (which Heaven avert!) should prove to be his lot, then let him take religion to his aid, and place his whole reliance on that all-gracious Master, who never fails his servants in affliction, when they piously resort to him.
The awful morning arrived, and Isabella, beautiful as an angel, and fresh as the dew of Heaven, rose with the dawn; and having attired herself with a simplicity pure as her thoughts, and elegant as her manners, came forth from her chamber, and presented herself to the eyes of her expecting lover: he led her down the stairs to the room where her friends were assembled, and the Rev. Dr. Sandford was in readiness to perform the solemn office, and pronounce the nuptial benediction; which service being closed, turning to her father, whilst Henry

yet held her trembling hand, she dropt on her knees at his feet, and jointly with her husband, in the like reverential attitude, received his fatherly blessing, accompanied with tears of joyful sensibility and tender embraces: the same suit was preferred to the father of Henry, and the same affectionate return was made to it by that amiable person, in a stile peculiarly impressive and affecting. A few old and faithful domestics were admitted; and honest Zachary Cawdle, by claim derived from long attachment, and services as old in date as the first breath that Henry drew, was present on the occasion; and now, in his ardent manner, joy boiling over at his eyes, pronounced them to be indisputably the most lovely couple that ever plighted their faith to each other—"And, by the blessing of Heaven," added he, "upon their laudable endeavours, I predict they will give being to others as beautiful as themselves."

They now sate down to a hasty breakfast, which being dispatched, Sir Roger again embraced his daughter, and then resigning her hand to its happy possessor, attended them to the door, where their chaise with post-horses was in waiting, which whirled them in their

rapid course to London; where they arrived, with happy omens, as the evening closed, and found all things ready for their reception.
The following day the worthy Baronet, punctual to his appointed hour, arrived with his friends, Mr. Delapoer and Dr. Sandford, the latter of whom took up his abode with a relation at the other end of the town. Sir Roger was well pleased with the airy situation of his house, and still more delighted with the unremitted attention of his son and daughter, who devoted to him and Delapoer all those hours which some bestow on frivolous amusements, some on less innocent occupations. In the course of their residence here every thing that the sage provision of the law could do for them and their posterity was completed; and, at Sir Roger's suit, our hero had a grant, by royal licence, to take the name and bear the arms of Manstock, thus becoming the adopted representative of that antient and opulent house.
When the session was closed, and they returned to the family seat at Manstock, the festivities they had fled from were celebrated with becoming splendor, and the hospitable doors were thrown open to their neighbours,

both rich and poor. Heaven blessed their days with prosperity, and crowned their wishes with a beauteous offspring. Faithful to Ezekiel's charge, Henry never forgot the lessons of adversity, nor those faithful friends whom his adversity had tried and approved.—To Zachary, to the house of Williams, and to Ezekiel, in his humble cottage, he was ever the same grateful, cordial and unaltered friend. The charge of young Blachford's affairs he devolved upon Ezekiel, with a proper allowance, but still under his own superintendance; Lord Crowbery also put the good apostle into certain offices of trust, which brought him some profit, and, what was more grateful to his spirit, a situation of some respectability amongst his neighbours. Williams throve in his profession, and Susan was not wanting to provide him with those that served to keep his house aside and his industry alert.
Delapoer retired to his mansion near Hagley, where he had every year the pleasure of embracing his children, when they visited their maternal mansion and property in those parts.
If perfect happiness was ever dealt to mortals, it was surely the peculiar lot of Henry and Isabella.—Domestic harmony that knew

no interruption, hearts fondly united, and tempers happily matched, the good-will of all who knew them, the abundant gifts of fortune, and the grateful blessings of the poor, compounded their enjoyments. Meanwhile the beauteous form of Isabella never yielded up one fleeting charm to the wide-wasting hand of Time, but Heaven restored the loss by adding every hour fresh beauties to her mind.


FINIS.